Journal of Complex Networks (2018) 6, 485–565
doi: 10.1093/comnet/cny005
Advance Access Publication on 3 April 2018

Review

Lia Papadopoulos
Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
epapad@sas.upenn.edu
Mason A. Porter
Department of Mathematics, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA,
Oxford Centre for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX2 6GG, UK and CABDyN Complexity Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 1HP, UK
mason@math.ucla.edu
Karen E. Daniels
Department of Physics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
kdaniel@ncsu.edu
and
Danielle S. Bassett†
Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, PA, 19104, USA, Department of
Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA and Department of
Electrical & Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, PA, 19104, USA
†
Corresponding author. Email: dsb@seas.upenn.edu
Edited by: Ernesto Estrada
[Received on 26 August 2017; editorial decision on 24 January 2018; accepted on 2 February 2018]
The arrangements of particles and forces in granular materials have a complex organization on multiple spatial scales that range from local structures to mesoscale and system-wide ones. This multiscale
organization can affect how a material responds or reconﬁgures when exposed to external perturbations
or loading. The theoretical study of particle-level, force-chain, domain and bulk properties requires the
development and application of appropriate physical, mathematical, statistical and computational frameworks. Traditionally, granular materials have been investigated using particulate or continuum models,
each of which tends to be implicitly agnostic to multiscale organization. Recently, tools from network
science have emerged as powerful approaches for probing and characterizing heterogeneous architectures
across different scales in complex systems, and a diverse set of methods have yielded fascinating insights
into granular materials. In this article, we review work on network-based approaches to studying granular
matter and explore the potential of such frameworks to provide a useful description of these systems and
to enhance understanding of their underlying physics. We also outline a few open questions and highlight
particularly promising future directions in the analysis and design of granular matter and other kinds of
material networks.
Keywords: granular materials; particulate systems; networks; multiscale organization.
© The authors 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Network analysis of particles and grains

486

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Glossary of Terms

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Granular materials: Granular materials are collections of discrete, macroscopic particles that interact
with each other through contact (rather than long-range) forces. Importantly, these systems are nonequilibrium: the particles are large enough to avoid rearrangement under thermal ﬂuctuations, and
they lose energy through frictional and inelastic interactions with neighboring particles.
Particulate materials: Like granular materials, particulate materials are collections of discrete, macroscopic elements. However, the elements making up the system may be entities—such as bubbles, foams,
colloids, or suspensions—that include multiple phases of matter. The term “particulate material” is a
more general one than “granular material”.
Packing fraction: The fraction of a granular material that is physically occupied by the particles. One
calculates the packing fraction as the ratio of the total volume of all particles to the total volume of the
region that contains the particles. The packing fraction is also sometimes called the “packing density”
or “volume fraction”.
Force chain: Force chains are typically described as the subset of inter-particle contacts in a granular
material that carry the largest forces in the system. They often form ﬁlamentary networks that align
preferentially with the principal stress axes under which a material is loaded.
Jamming: As certain system parameters change, disordered, particulate materials typically undergo a transition from an underconstrained, liquid-like state to a rigid, solid-like state characterized by the onset
of mechanical stability. The transition to/from a jammed state often arises through increases/decreases
in packing fraction (or in contact number), which can occur due to an applied load. A formal theory
of jamming exists for idealized situations (with soft, frictionless, and spherical particles).
Isostatic: A jammed packing is isostatic when it has exactly the minimum number of contacts that are
required for maintaining mechanical stability through force balance and torque balance. One typically
examines isostaticity by calculating the mean number of contacts per particle. “Hyperstatic” and
“hypostatic” packings have more and fewer contacts, respectively.
Mono/bi/poly-disperse: A particulate material is monodisperse if it is composed of particles of a single
species (i.e., particles with the same size, shape, and material properties). Bidisperse materials have
particles of two species, and polydisperse materials can either have particles from three or more discrete
species or have particles with a continuum of properties.
Structural rigidity theory: For a speciﬁed mechanical structure that is composed of ﬁxed-length rods
connected to one another by ﬂexible hinges, structural rigidity theory studies the conditions under
which the associated structural graph (in which the edges correspond to the rods and the nodes
correspond to the hinges) is able to resist deformations and support applied loads.
Stress: A stress is a force applied to an object’s surfaces. (The units measure a force per unit area.) Shear
stress arises from the component of the applied force that acts in a direction parallel to the object’s
cross-section, and normal stress arises from the perpendicular component.
Strain: Strain is the fractional (unitless) deformation of a material that arises due to an applied stress.
One calculates strain from the relative displacement of particles in a material, excluding rigid-body
motion such as translation or rotation. Like stress, strain has both shear and normal components.
Pure shear: One can use the term “pure shear” to describe either stresses or strains in which an object is
elongated along one axis and shortened in the perpendicular direction without inducing a net rotation.
Axial compression: In axial compression, one applies inward forces to an object in one direction (uniaxial),
two directions (biaxial), or all directions (isotropic compression). These forces result in uniaxial strain,
biaxial strain, or isotropic strain, respectively.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

487

1. Introduction
Granular materials comprise a subset of the larger set of particulate matter [1–6]. People engage with
such materials—which include sands, beans, grains, powders such as cornstarch, and more—often in their
daily lives. One can deﬁne a granular material as a large collection of discrete, macroscopic particles that
interact only when in contact. Granular materials are inherently non-equilibrium in two distinct ways,
characterized by (1) the lack of rearrangement under thermal ﬂuctuations and (2) the loss of energy through
frictional and inelastic dissipation during contact between grains. Nonetheless, they phenomenologically
reproduce equilibrium states of matter, exhibiting characteristics of solids (forming rigid materials),
liquids (ﬂowing out of a container) or gases (infrequent contacts between grains), depending on the type
and amount of driving. In this review, we focus mainly on granular solids and slow (non-inertial) ﬂows
[7]; these are dense materials in which sustained inter-particle contacts provide the dominant contribution
to material properties. The functional properties of granular materials are related in a non-trivial way to
the complex manner in which particles interact with one another and to the spatial scales (particle, chain,
domain and bulk) and time scales over which those interactions occur. For example, pairs of particles can
exert force on one another in a local neighbourhood. However, as particles push on adjacent particles, the
combined effect can transmit forces over long distances via important mesoscale structures commonly
called force chains [8, 9]. The idea of networks has been invoked for many years to help provide a
quantitative understanding and explanation of force-chain organization [10–14]. Broadly speaking, force
chains form a network of ﬁlamentary-like structures that are visually apparent in images from experiments,
like the one shown in Fig. 1. In such images, the brighter particles carry larger forces [8, 16]. Furthermore,
force chains tend to align preferentially along the principal stress axes [17]. It can be helpful to think of
a force-chain network as the backbone of strong forces that span a system, providing support for both
static [18] and dynamic [16] loading. However, weaker forces can also play a stabilizing role, much as
guy-wires do on an aerial tower [19, 20].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Cyclic shear/compression: These terms refer to procedures in which repeated cycles of shear or
compression are applied to the same system.
Shear band: A shear band is a narrow region of a particulate material in which most of the strain is
localized, whereas other regions remain largely undeformed. A shear band is also sometimes called a
region of “strain localization”.
Strain softening/hardening: As a material is loaded and undergoes deformation, continuing deformation
can become either easier (strain softening) or harder (strain hardening). Eventually, after much deformation, the material can reach a critical state in which there are no further changes in the resistance
to deformations.
Stress ratio: The stress ratio, which is analogous to Coulomb’s Law, is the ratio of shear to normal
stresses. Frictional failure occurs when the shear force exceeds the product of the normal force and
the coefﬁcient of friction.
Photoelasticity/birefringence: Photoelasticity is an optical technique for quantifying internal stresses in
a material. This experimental methodology is based on the transmission of polarized light through
“birefringent” materials, which have preferentially fast and slow directions for the propagation of light.
DEM or MD simulations: The Discrete (or Distinct) Element Method and Molecular Dynamics simulations are related numerical techniques that compute the motions of all particles in a system (such as in
a granular material). In both methods, a computer algorithm treats each particle as an object subject
to Newton’s laws of motion, where forces consist of body forces (e.g., gravity) and those that arise
from interactions with the object’s neighbors.

488

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

It is also possible for sets of particles to cluster together into larger geographical domains, with
potentially distinct properties, that can have weak structural boundaries between them [21]. At the largest
scale, granular materials as a whole exhibit bulk properties, such as mechanical stability or instability in
response to sheer or compression [22]. All the aforementioned spatial scales are potentially relevant for
understanding phenomena such as transmission of acoustic waves [23], thermal conductivity and heat
transfer [24], electrical properties [25] and more. The time scales of interactions in granular materials
are also important, and they can vary over many orders of magnitude. For example, in systems under
compression, statistical ﬂuctuations of grain displacements depend fundamentally on the length of the
strain step (i.e., ‘increment’) over which one makes measurements, as ﬂuctuations over short windows
are consistent with anomalous diffusion and those over longer windows are consistent with Brownian
behaviour [26].
The principled study of such diverse characteristics and organization in a single system can be very
challenging, and the development of appropriate physical, mathematical, statistical and computational
models is important to attain a mechanistic understanding of granular materials. Traditionally, it has been
common to model granular materials using either particulate-based or continuum-based frameworks
[20]. However, both of these approaches are often implicitly agnostic to intermediate-scale organization,
which is important for understanding both static granular packings [27] as well as granular dynamics
[28]. Recently, tools from network science [29, 30] and related mathematical subjects—which include
approaches that can account explicitly for mesoscale structures [31–34]—have been used successfully
to study properties of granular materials across multiple spatial and temporal scales. The most common
representation of a network, an important idea for the study of complex systems of interacting entities
[35], is as a graph [30]. A graph consists of a set of nodes (to represent the entities) and a set of
edges, each of which represents an interaction between a pair of entities (or between an entity and
itself). Increasingly, more complicated network representations (such as multilayer networks [36]) are

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 1. Force chains in an experimental granular system. A photoelastic image of a quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) packing of
photoelastic disks that were subjected to pure shear. The photoelastic image allows one to visualize the force pattern in a material.
Bright particles carry the strongest forces, and one can observe that a network of force chains tends to align along the principal
stress axes. Modern techniques allow one to determine vector contact forces at each inter-particle contact. We adapted this ﬁgure,
with permission, from [15].

GRANULAR NETWORKS

489

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

also employed. Moreover, there is also a growing recognition that it is important to consider the impact
of other features, such as spatial embedding and other spatial effects [37], on network structure and
dynamics, rather than taking an approach that promises that ‘one size ﬁts all’. Network science offers
methods for quantitatively probing and analysing large, interacting systems whose associated networks
have heterogeneous patterns that defy explanations attained by considering exclusively all-to-all, regular,
or lattice-like interactions [29].
There are several open problems in granular physics that may beneﬁt from network-science
approaches. In particular, because granular materials have multiple relevant length and time scales
[16, 38–41], it can be challenging to model and quantify their structural organization, material properties and responses to external loads [42–46]. However, although complex, the pairwise inter-particle
interactions that underlie and govern the structure and behaviour of granular systems (and other particulate matter) render them amenable to various network representations and network-based analyses.
Smart and Ottino [47] were among the ﬁrst to explicitly suggest and formalize the use of ideas from
network science to begin to study some of the difﬁcult questions in granular physics. In their article, they highlighted the ability of a network-based perspective to complement traditional methods
for studying granular materials and to open new doors for the analysis of these complex systems.
One place in which network analysis may be especially useful is in quantifying how local, pairwise
interactions between particles in a granular packing yield organization on larger spatial scales (both
mesoscale and system-level). For example, in sheared or compressed granular packings, such organization can manifest as force chains or other intermediate-sized sets of particles that together comprise
a collective structure. Network science provides approaches to extract and quantitatively characterize
heterogeneous architectures at microscale, mesoscale and macroscale sizes, and one can use these
methods to understand important physical phenomena, including how such multiscale organization
relates to bulk material properties or to spatial and temporal patterns of force transmission through
a material.
Network-based approaches should also be able to provide new insights into the mechanisms that
govern the dynamics of granular materials. For example, as we will discuss, network analysis can provide
quantitative descriptions of how the structure of a dense granular material evolves as a system deforms
under external loads (such as those induced by compression, shear, tapping or impact), and it can be helpful
for describing certain aspects of complex dynamics (such as granular ﬂows). Furthermore, it is important
to consider the relative time scales of dynamics (e.g., sound propagation) on networks and the evolution
of network structure. We also expect ideas from temporal networks [48] or adaptive networks [49] to be
fruitful for studying faster structural dynamics, and investigation of granular dynamics in general should
beneﬁt from the development of both novel network representations and methods of network analysis that
are designed speciﬁcally to understand temporally evolving systems. Another important problem in the
study of granular materials is to predict when and where a granular system will fail. There has been some
progress made in this area using network-based approaches, but it is important to continue to develop
and apply tools from network analysis and related areas to gain a deeper understanding of which network
features regulate or are most indicative of eventual failure. Another exciting direction for future work is
to combine network-based approaches with questions about material design. In particular, can one use
network-based approaches to help engineer granular systems—or other materials that are amenable to
network representations—with desired and specialized properties?
It is also important to note that network-based representations and methods of analysis can provide
insightful descriptions of granular materials with various additional complexities, such as systems that
are composed of differently-shaped particles, three-dimensional (3D) materials and so on. This ﬂexibility makes the application of tools from network science a powerful approach for studying the structural

490

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

2. Network construction and characterization
2.1 What is a network?
It is often useful to model a complex system as a network, the simplest type of which is a graph [29, 50].
For most of our article, we will use the terms network and graph synonymously, but the former concept
is more general than the latter.1 A graph G consists of nodes (i.e., vertices), where pairs of nodes are
adjacent to each other via edges (i.e., links). We denote the set of nodes by V and the set of edges by E .
A node can also be adjacent to itself via a self-edge (which is also sometimes called a self-loop), and a
multi-edge describes the presence of two or more edges that are attached to (i.e., incident to) the same pair
of nodes. (Unless we state otherwise, we henceforth assume that our networks have neither self-edges
nor multi-edges.) The number of nodes in a graph is the size of the graph, and we also use the word ‘size’
in the same way for other sets of nodes. A subgraph of a graph G is a graph constructed using a subset
of G’s nodes and edges.
An edge between two nodes represents some sort of relationship between them. For example, edges
can represent information ﬂow between different parts of the internet [53], friendship or other social
interactions between people [54], trading between banks [55], anatomical or functional connections
between large-scale brain regions [56, 57], physical connections between particles in contact [21, 58] and
so on. Edges can be either unweighted or weighted, and they can be either undirected or directed [29]. In
an unweighted (i.e., binary) network, an edge between two nodes is assigned a binary value (traditionally
0 or 1) to encode the absence or presence of a connection. In a weighted network, edges can take a variety

1

Indeed, it is increasingly important to examine network representations that are more complicated than graphs (see Sections 4.1
and 2.2.10)—such as multilayer networks [36], simplicial complexes [51] and others—and it is also essential to study dynamical
processes on networks, rather than focusing exclusively on structural characteristics [52].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

properties and dynamics of granular systems. Such a framework also allows one to compare network
architectures in diverse situations, such as between simulations and experiments, across systems that are
composed of different types of particles or exposed to different loading conditions, and more. Exploiting
these capabilities will yield improved understanding of which properties and behaviours of granular materials are general, versus which are speciﬁc to various details of a system. With the continued development
of physically-informed network-analysis tools, network-based approaches show considerable promise
for further development of both qualitative and quantitative descriptions of the organization and complex
behaviour of granular materials.
The purpose of our article is to review the nascent application of network theory (and related topics)
to the study of granular materials. We begin in Section 2.1 with a mathematical description of networks.
In Section 2.2, we brieﬂy review a set of measures that one can calculate on graphs and which have been
useful in past investigations of granular materials. In Section 3, we review several ways in which granular
materials have been represented as networks, and we discuss investigations of such networks to quantify
heterogeneous, multiscale organization in granular materials and to understand how these systems evolve
when exposed to external perturbations. We also point out insights into the underlying physics that have
resulted from network-based investigations of granular matter. We close in Section 4 with some thoughts
on the many remaining open questions, and we describe a few speciﬁc future directions that we feel are
important to pursue. We hope that our review will be helpful for those interested in using tools from
network science to better understand the physics of granular systems, and that it will spur interest in
using these techniques to inform material design.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

491

where i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N}. For a network in which nodes do not have labels, one can apply a permutation
to A’s rows and columns—one uses the same permutation for each—to obtain another adjacency matrix
that represents the same network. In this article, when we refer to ‘the’ adjacency matrix A of a graph
with unlabelled nodes, we mean any one of these matrices, which have the same properties (spectra, etc.).
For a weighted graph, if nodes i and j are adjacent via an edge, we denote the corresponding edge
weight by wij (which is usually given by a non-negative real number (e.g., the value of the normal or
tangential component of the force between two contacting particles)2 ). An element in the associated
weighted adjacency matrix (which is sometimes called a weight matrix) W is

wij , if there is an edge between nodes i and j,
(2.2)
Wij =
0, otherwise.
For the more general case of a weighted, directed graph, if there is an edge from node j to node i,
then we let wij represent the weight of that edge [29]. The associated weighted and directed adjacency
matrix W is

wij , if there is an edge from node j to node i,
(2.3)
Wij =
0, otherwise.
An adjacency matrix associated with an undirected network is symmetric, but an adjacency matrix
for a directed network need not be (and is symmetric if and only if all directed edges are reciprocated).
In the present review, we primarily consider undirected networks, although we will occasionally make
remarks about directed situations.
For weighted graphs, it is often also important to consider a binary adjacency matrix A associated
with a weight matrix W. Note that A captures only the connectivity of nodes (i.e., their adjacencies),
irrespective of how strongly they interact with each other. In terms of W, the corresponding binary
network (which can be either directed or undirected) is

1, if Wij  = 0,
Aij =
(2.4)
0, otherwise.
It is common to use terms like network topology when discussing structural properties of A, and sometimes
one uses terms like network geometry when discussing properties that also depend on edge weights.

2 We do not consider edges with negative weights, although it may be interesting to do so in future work if there is an appropriate
physical reason.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

of different values to convey varying strengths of relationships between nodes. In an undirected network,
all edges are bidirectional, so one assumes that all relationships are reciprocal. In a directed network,
however, edges have a direction that encodes a connection from one node to another.
An adjacency matrix is a useful way to represent the information in a graph. For an unweighted and
undirected graph, an element of the adjacency matrix A of an N-node network is

1, if there is an edge between nodes i and j,
Aij =
(2.1)
0, otherwise,

492

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

(a)

(e)

(c)

(f)

Fig. 2. From a packing to a network. (a) A sample packing of grains. (b) Representation of particles as network nodes. (c) Representation of contacts as network edges. (d) Graph representation of nodes and edges. The edges highlighted in green illustrate a cycle,
which is a loop of physical contacts. The edges highlighted in peach illustrate a set of triangular loops, which are minimally-rigid
structures in the context of structural rigidity. Edge weights often represent contact forces, which we illustrate here with different
line widths. The degree k of a node is equal to the number of edges attached (i.e., incident) to that node, and the strength (i.e.,
weighted degree) s of a node is given by the sum of the weights of the edges attached to that node. One can (e) encode an unweighted
(i.e., binary) graph as an unweighted adjacency matrix and (f) encode a weighted graph as a weighted adjacency matrix.

Because we will also employ ideas from subjects like algebraic topology (see Section 2.2.10), we will
need to be very careful with such terminology.
The network representations that have been used to study granular matter (and other kinds of materials)
employ diverse deﬁnitions of edges (both weighted and unweighted and both directed and undirected),
and some generalizations of graphs have also been considered. See Fig. 2 for a schematic showing possible
choices of nodes and edges for a network representation of a granular packing. A variety of tools and
measures from network analysis have been used to study granular networks. We discuss some of these
ideas in Section 2.2.
2.2 Some tools for characterizing granular networks
Network theory [29] provides myriad ways to characterize and quantify the topological and geometrical organization of complex networks. Thus, different network methods can reveal different important
features of the underlying system, and these features, in turn, can help explain how a system behaves
in certain situations. In the context of granular matter, for example, it is often desirable to understand
the stability of a material, mechanical responses to external stresses, or wave propagation through a
system. Recent investigations have demonstrated that network analysis can inform understanding of the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

(d)

(b)

GRANULAR NETWORKS

493

2.2.1 Degree. One local property of a network is node degree. In an undirected network, a node’s degree
is equal to the number of edges that are attached to it (see Fig. 2d). We denote the degree of node i as ki ,
and we recall that N denotes the total number of nodes. For an unweighted graph with adjacency matrix
A, one can calculate ki with the formula
ki =

N


Aij .

(2.5)

j=1

One can generalize the idea of degree to strength (i.e., weighted degree) using a weight matrix W
[59, 60]. The strength si of node i is equal to the sum of the weights of the edges that are attached to that
node:
si =

N


Wij .

(2.6)

j=1

Its associated degree ki is still given by Eq. (2.5).
A common network representation of granular materials is to treat particles as nodes and physical
contacts between particles as either unweighted or weighted edges (see Fig. 2a–c). In this representation,
node degree and node strength quantify information at the scale of single particles.
One can compute the mean degree (a global property) of a network by calculating
k =

1 
ki ,
N i

(2.7)

and one can similarly compute the mean strength with the formula
s =

1 
si .
N i

(2.8)

In an undirected network, mean degree is related to N and the total number m of edges through the relation
k = 2m
. It is sometimes useful to characterize a network using its degree distribution P(k) [29], which
N
gives the probability that a node has degree k.
When one represents a granular packing as a contact network (see Fig. 2 and Section 3.1), which is
a binary network (i.e., unweighted network), the degree ki of node i is known more commonly in the
physics literature as its contact number or coordination number Zi . If every node has the same degree (or
even if most nodes have this degree), such as in a regular lattice, one often refers to the mean coordination
number Z of the lattice or packing. It is well-known that coordination number is related to the stability
of granular systems [61] and plays a critical role in the jamming transition [62–64], a change of phase

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

mechanisms that underlie these phenomena. In this section, we discuss several network concepts; and in
Section 3, we describe how they have been used for the study of granular materials. We are, of course,
not presenting an exhaustive list of methods from network science. See [29] and other books and reviews
(and references therein) for discussions of other tools. For simplicity, we primarily give deﬁnitions for
undirected networks, though many of the ideas that we present also have directed counterparts. We start
with basic network diagnostics, and also discuss some more complicated methods.

494

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

from an underconstrained state to a rigid state that is characterized by the onset of mechanical stability.3
We discuss these ideas further throughout the review.

lij = [Al ]ij .

(2.9)

Various types of random walks yield short paths between nodes in a network, and such ideas (and their
relation to topics such as spectral graph theory) are very insightful for studying networks [65].
In an undirected network, a path from node i to node j is necessarily also a path from node j to node i.
However, this is not typically true in directed networks, which have sometimes been utilized in studies of
granular force chains (see e.g., [13]). Depending on a network’s structure, there may be several or no paths
between a given pair of nodes. An undirected network is called connected if there exists a path between
each pair of nodes, and a directed network is called strongly connected if there is a path between each
pair of nodes [29]. (A directed network is called weakly connected if its associated undirected network
is connected, and a strongly connected network is necessarily also weakly connected.) In networks of
granular packings, both the existence and lengths of paths can impact system behaviour. A connected
network consists of a single component. When a network has multiple components, it is common to study
one component at a time (e.g., focusing on a largest connected component (LCC), which is one that has
the largest number of nodes).
The length of an unweighted path is the number of edges in the associated sequence, and it is sometimes
also called the hop distance (or occasionally, unfortunately, the topological distance). Paths in a network
can also be weighted by deﬁning some (possibly abstract) notion of distance associated with the edges
of the network. For example, in a spatially-embedded network [37], distance may refer to actual physical
distance along an edge, in which case the length of a weighted path in the network is given by the sum of
the physical distances along the sequence of edges in the path. However, one can also consider ‘distance’
more abstractly. For example, in a transportation or ﬂow network, one can deﬁne a distance between two
adjacent nodes to be some measure of resistance between those nodes, and then the length of a weighted
path in such a network is given by the sum of the resistances along the sequence of edges in the path.4

3 Unless we note otherwise, we use the phrase jamming in the formal sense of the jamming transition as deﬁned by [63, 64].
Packings of particles above the jamming point (a critical point related to the jamming transition) are rigid and overconstrained
(i.e., ‘hyperstatic’), those at this point are marginally stable and exactly constrained (i.e., ‘isostatic’), and those below this point are
underconstrained (i.e., ‘hypostatic’). Additionally, packings below the jamming point are sometimes called ‘unjammed’, and those
above the jamming point are called ‘jammed’.
4 One can also calculate distances between nodes if they occupy positions in a metric space (such as a latent one that determines
the probability that a pair of nodes is adjacent to each other) [66], and the properties of that metric space can inﬂuence the distances
(namely, the ones along a network) that concern us.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

2.2.2 Walks and paths. In a network, a walk is an alternating sequence of nodes and edges that starts and
ends at a node, such that consecutive edges are both incident to a common node. A walk thus describes a
traversal from one node to another node (or to itself) along edges of a network. A path is a walk that does
not intersect itself or visit the same node (or the same edge) more than once, except for a closed path,
which starts and ends at the same node (see Section 2.2.3). One can compute the number of (unweighted)
walks of a given length from a binary, undirected adjacency matrix A [29]. The length l of an unweighted
walk is deﬁned as the number of edges in the associated sequence (counting repeated edges the number
of times that they appear). Letting lij denote the number of walks of length l between nodes i and j, one
calculates

GRANULAR NETWORKS

495

L=


1
dij .
N(N − 1) i,j (i=j)

(2.10)

Note that one must be cautious when computing the mean shortest-path distance on disconnected networks
(i.e., on networks that have more than one component), because the usual convention is to set the distance
between two nodes in different components to be inﬁnite [29]. Therefore, in a network with multiple
components, the mean shortest-path distance L from Eq. (2.10) is inﬁnite. One solution to this problem
is to compute L for each component separately. Another network notion that relies on paths is network
efﬁciency [69, 70]
E=

 1
1
.
N(N − 1) i,j (i=j) dij

(2.11)

One can generalize measures based on walks and paths to incorporate edge weights [70, 71]. Letting
dijw denote the shortest, weighted network distance between nodes i and j, one can deﬁne a weighted mean
shortest-path distance L w and weighted efﬁciency E w as in Eqs. (2.10) and (2.11), respectively, but now
one uses dijw instead of dij . The network efﬁciency E is a normalized version of the Harary index of a
graph [72]. Additionally, the convention dij = ∞ (or dijw = ∞) if there is no path from i to j allows
one to use Eq. (2.11) (or its weighted counterpart E w ) on connected graphs or on graphs with more than
one component. For both unweighted and weighted scenarios, large values of network efﬁciency tend to
correspond to small values of mean shortest-path length, and vice versa. One can also readily generalize
notions of paths, distances, and efﬁciency to directed networks [69–71].
In later sections, we will describe the use of paths, walks and related ideas for investigating the
structure of granular materials and their response to perturbations—including how these quantities change
as a granular packing is compressed and goes through the jamming transition [73]—and we will also
describe their use in speciﬁc applications, such as in understanding heat transfer through a granular
material [24].
2.2.3 Cycles. A cycle (i.e., a closed walk) in a network is a walk that begins and ends at the same node
[30]. As with other walks, one way to characterize a cycle is by calculating its length. An l-cycle is a cycle
in which l edges are traversed (counting repeated edges the number of times that they appear in the cycle).
A simple cycle is a cycle that does not include repeated nodes or edges, aside from one repetition of the
origin node at the termination of a closed cycle. Thus, for example, a simple 3-cycle in an undirected
network is a triangle. For the remainder of this review, we assume that cycles are simple cycles, unless
we explicitly state otherwise. In the context of a granular packing, one can directly map particle contact
loops—sets of physically-connected grains arranged in a circuit—to cycles in a corresponding graphical
representation (see Fig. 2d). The length l is odd for an odd cycle and even for an even cycle.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

We use the term network distance to indicate a distance between two nodes (which can be either
unweighted or weighted) that is computed by summing along edges in a path. A geodesic path—that
is, a shortest path (which need not be unique)—between two nodes can be particularly relevant (though
other short paths are often also important), and a breadth-ﬁrst search (BFS) algorithm [67] is commonly
employed to ﬁnd geodesic paths in a network. The diameter of a graph is the maximum geodesic distance
between any pair of nodes.
Denoting the shortest, unweighted network distance (i.e., shortest-path distance) between nodes i and
j as dij , the mean shortest-path distance L between pairs of nodes in a graph is [68]

496

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

2.2.4 Clustering coefﬁcients. Clustering coefﬁcients are commonly-used diagnostics to measure the
density of triangles either locally or globally in a network [29]. For an unweighted, undirected network,
the local clustering coefﬁcient Ci is usually deﬁned as the number of triangles involving node i divided
by the number of triples centred at node i [68, 86]. A triple is a set of three nodes that can include either
three edges (to form a 3-cycle) or just two of them. In terms of the adjacency matrix and node degree,
the local clustering coefﬁcient is

Ci =

hj

Ahj Aih Aij

ki (ki − 1)

(2.12)

for ki ≥ 2 (and Ci = 0 if ki ∈ {0, 1}). One can then calculate a global clustering coefﬁcient of a network
as the mean of Ci over all nodes:

C=

N
1 
Ci .
N i

(2.13)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

We brieﬂy note a few related concepts that are used to examine cycles in graphs because of their
relevance to several network-based studies of granular materials. These are the notions of cycle space,
cycle basis, and minimum cycle basis [30, 74]. The cycle space of an undirected graph is the set of all
simple cycles in a graph along with all subgraphs that consist of unions of edge-disjoint simple cycles
(i.e., they can share nodes but not edges) [75, 76]. A cycle basis is a minimal set of simple cycles such
that any element of the cycle space can be written as a symmetric difference of cycles in the cycle basis
[75]. Finally, for unweighted networks, a minimum cycle basis is a basis in which the total length of all
cycles in the basis is minimal. For weighted networks, it is a basis in which the sum of the weights of all
cycles in the basis is minimal.
Minimum cycle bases can provide useful information about the structure and organization of cycles
in a network, so several algorithms have been developed to extract them (see, for example, [77, 78]).
Once one has determined a minimum cycle basis, one can examine the distribution of cycle lengths or
deﬁne measures to quantify the participation of different nodes in cycles of different lengths. For example,
cycle
Walker et al. [79, 80] deﬁned the concept of a cycle-participation vector Xi
= [xi0 , xi3 , . . . , xil ] for each
node i. The elements of this vector count the number of cycles of each length in which node i participates.
In this deﬁnition, xi3 is the number of 3-cycles in which node i participates, xi4 is the number of 4-cycles
in which node i participates, and so on (up to cycles of length l). If node i is not part of any cycle, then
j
xi0 = 1 and xi = 0 for all j ≥ 3; otherwise, xi0 = 0.
One reason to examine cycles in granular networks [58, 73, 81–84] is that they can help characterize
mesoscale structural features of a network. Cycles that are non-trivial involve more than a single node,
but they do not typically embody global structures of a large network. This makes them appealing for
studying network representations of granular materials, because mesoscale features seem to play a role
in the behaviour of these systems [21]. Perhaps the most important motivation, however, is that cycles
appear to be relevant for the stability and rigidity of a system. Speciﬁcally, in the context of structural
rigidity theory, 3-cycles tend to be stabilizing structures that can maintain rigidity under applied forces
[85], whereas 4-cycles can deform under applied forces (see Section 3.1.2). In Section 3, we discuss in
more detail how cycles can help characterize granular systems.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

(a)

497

(b)

There is also another (and simpler) common way of deﬁning a global clustering coefﬁcient in a network that is particularly useful when trying to determine analytical approximations of expectations over
ensembles of random graphs [29, 87].
The notion of a local clustering coefﬁcient has also been extended to weighted networks in several
ways [59, 88–90]. In one formulation [59], a local, weighted clustering coefﬁcient Ciw is deﬁned as
Ciw =

 (Wij + Wih )
1
Aij Aih Ajh
si (ki − 1) j,h
2

(2.14)

for strength si > 0 and degree ki ≥ 2. The quantity Ciw = 0 if either si = 0 (so that ki = 0) or ki = 1.
Recall that W and A are, respectively, associated weighted and unweighted adjacency matrices. The
mean of Ciw over all nodes gives a weighted clustering coefﬁcient C w of a network. As we will discuss
later (see Sections 3.1.3 and 3.2.4), clustering coefﬁcients have been employed in several studies of
granular materials. For example, they have been used to examine stability in granular networks [58, 73,
82–84]. See Fig. 3a for an example of the spatial distribution of a clustering coefﬁcient in a granular
packing.
2.2.5 Centrality measures. In network analysis, one often calculates centrality measures in efforts to
quantify the importances of particular nodes, edges, or other structures in a network [29]. Different types
of centralities characterize importance in different ways. The degree centrality (i.e., degree) of a node, for
example, is simply the number of edges attached to it (see Section 2.2.1). A few other types of centrality
that have been used to study granular materials are closeness centrality, node betweenness centrality,
edge betweenness centrality, and subgraph centrality.
Notions of closeness centrality of a node measure how close that node is to other nodes in a network
[91]. For a given node i, the most common notion of closeness is deﬁned as the inverse of the sum

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 3. Network diagnostics reveal different types of structure in granular packings. The two panels show the same compressed
collection of photoelastic disks. One can measure the forces between particles and use the magnitude of the force between particle
i and particle j to weight the edge between node i and node j in a weighted, undirected graph representation of the packing. (a) One
can compute a weighted clustering coefﬁcient at each network node (i.e., particle) to probe local structure in the packing. (b) One
can compute a weighted betweenness centrality at each network node to probe how often its associated particle lies on a weighted
shortest path between any two particles in the packing. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [21].

498

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

over the shortest-path lengths from node i to all other nodes j in a network. That is, node i’s closeness
centrality is
(2.15)

Note that if we use the convention that the distance between two nodes in different components is inﬁnite,
then Eq. (2.15) only makes sense for connected networks. For any network with more than one component,
Eq. (2.15) yields a closeness centrality of 0.
The geodesic node betweenness centrality of node i is the fraction of geodesic paths (either unweighted
or weighted) between distinct nodes (not including i) that traverse node i [91]. Let ψgh (i) denote the number
of geodesic paths from node g to node h that traverse node i (with i ∈ {g, h}), and let ψgh denote the total
number of geodesic paths from node g to node h. The geodesic node betweenness centrality of node i
is then
Bi =

 ψgh (i)
,
ψgh
g,h; g =h

i  ∈ {g, h}.

(2.16)

Geodesic node betweenness can probe the heterogeneity of force patterns in granular networks. See
Fig. 3b for an example spatial distribution of a geodesic node betweenness centrality in an experimental
granular packing. One can also compute a geodesic edge betweenness centrality by calculating the fraction
of shortest paths (either unweighted or weighted) that traverse it [92]. Let ψgh (i, j) denote the number of
geodesic paths from node g to node h that traverse the edge that is attached to node i and node j, and let
ψgh denote the total number of geodesic paths from node g to node h. The geodesic edge betweenness
centrality of this edge is then
Bije =

 ψgh (i, j)
.
ψgh
g,h; g =h

(2.17)

Another measure of node importance is subgraph centrality Y [93, 94], which quantiﬁes a node’s
participation in closed walks of all lengths. Recall from Section 2.2.2 that one can write the number of
length-l walks from node i to node j in terms of powers of the adjacency matrix A. To calculate closed
walks of length l that begin and end at node i, we take i = j in Eq. (2.9). The subgraph centrality of node
i, with a speciﬁc choice for how much we downweight longer paths, is then given by
Yi =

∞

[Al ]ii
l=0

l!

.

(2.18)

Because shorter walks are weighted more strongly than longer walks in Eq. (2.18), they contribute
more to the value of subgraph centrality (In other contexts, centrality measures based on walks have also
been used to compare the spatial efﬁciencies of different networks, and such ideas are worth exploring
in granular materials [72].). One can also express subgraph centrality in terms of the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of the adjacency matrix [93]. Let vαi denote the ith component of the αth eigenvector vα of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

N −1
Hi = 
.
j =i dij

GRANULAR NETWORKS

499

A, and let λα denote the corresponding αth eigenvalue. One can then write
Yi =

N


(vαi )2 eλα .

(2.19)

α=1

One can then calculate a mean subgraph centrality Y by averaging Yi over the nodes in a network. In
one study of granular materials [58], a subgraph centrality was examined for weighted networks by
considering the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the weight matrix W in Eq. (2.19).
One can also compute network bipartivity R [95] to quantify the contribution to mean subgraph
centrality Y from closed walks of even length. In particular, the network bipartivity Ri of node i is
Ri =

Yieven
,
Yi

(2.20)

where Yieven is the contribution to the sum in Eq. (2.18) from even values of l (i.e., even-length closed
walks). As with other node diagnostics, one can average bipartivity over all nodes in a network to obtain
a global measure, which we denote by R.
In Section 3, we will discuss calculations of closeness, betweenness, and subgraph centralities in
granular packings. Obviously, our discussion above does not give an exhaustive presentation of centrality
measures, and other types of centralities have also been used in studies of granular materials (see for
example, [21]).
2.2.6 Subgraphs, motifs and superfamilies. One can interpret the local clustering coefﬁcient in
Eq. (2.12) as a relationship between two small subgraphs: a triangle and a connected triple. Recall
that a subgraph of a graph G is a graph constructed using a subset of G’s nodes and edges. Conceptually,
one can interpret small subgraphs as building blocks or subunits that together can be used to construct
a network. For example, in a directed network, there exist three possible 2-node subgraphs (i.e., dyads):
the dyad in which node i is adjacent to node j by a directed edge, the dyad in which node j is adjacent to
node i by a directed edge, and the dyad in which both of these adjacencies exist. In a directed, unweighted
graph, there are 13 different connected 3-node subgraphs [96] (see Fig. 4).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 4. Subgraphs in networks. We show all 13 different 3-node subgraphs that can occur in a directed, unweighted graph. A motif
is a subgraph that occurs often (typically relative to some null model) in a particular network or set of networks [97]. We reproduced
this ﬁgure, with permission, from [96].

500

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

2.2.7 Community structure. Many real-world networks have structure on intermediate scales
(mesoscales) that can arise from particular organizations of nodes and edges [31–34, 111]. The most
commonly-studied mesoscale network property is community structure [31, 32], which describes sets of
nodes, called communities, that are densely (or strongly) interconnected to each other but only weakly
connected to other dense sets of nodes. In other words, a community has many edges (or large total edge
weight, in the case of weighted networks) between its own nodes, but the number and/or weight of edges
between nodes in different communities is supposed to be small. Once one has detected communities in a
network, one way to quantify their organization is to compute and/or average various network quantities
over the nodes (or edges) within each community separately, rather than over the entire network. For
example, one can compute the size (i.e., number of nodes) of a community, mean path lengths between
nodes in a given community, or some other quantity to help characterize the architecture of different communities in a network. Studying community structure can reveal useful insights about granular systems,
whose behaviour appears to be inﬂuenced by mesoscale network features [21, 27, 112–117].
Community structure and methods for detecting communities have been studied very extensively [31].
We will brieﬂy discuss the method of modularity maximization [29, 118, 119], in which one optimizes
an (occasionally infamous) objective function known as modularity, as this approach has been employed
previously in several studies of granular materials (see, e.g., Section 3.2.2). However, myriad other

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

The term motif is sometimes used for a small subgraph that occurs often in a particular network or
set of networks (typically relative to some null model, such as a randomly rewired network that preserves
the original degree distribution) [96–99]. Borrowing terminology from genetics, these motifs appear to
be overexpressed in a network (or set of networks). Unsurprisingly, the number of n-node subgraphs
increases very steeply with n, so identifying subgraphs in large networks is computationally expensive,
and many algorithms have been developed to estimate the number of subgraphs in an efﬁcient (though
approximate) way; see, for example, [96, 100–104]. In applying algorithms for motif counting to data, one
seeks to identify subgraphs that are present more often than expected in some appropriate random-network
null model.
The over-representation of a motif in a network is often interpreted as indicative of its playing a role
in the function of that network (though one has to be cautious about drawing such conclusions). For
example, 3-node motifs can form feedforward loops in which there are directed edges from node i1 to
node i2 , from node i2 to node i3 and from node i3 to node i1 . The identiﬁcation and characterization of
motifs has yielded insights into the structure and function of a variety of systems, including food webs
[105], gene-regulation networks of yeast [96], neuronal networks of the macaque monkey [106], and
others. For different types of networks, one can also identify so-called superfamilies, which are sets of
networks that have similar motif-frequency distributions [98]. There also exists a less-stringent deﬁnition
of a superfamily; in this deﬁnition, one disregards whether a subgraph is a motif in the sense of it being
more abundant than expected from some random-graph null model and instead considers a superfamily
to be a set of networks that have the same rank-ordering of the number of n-node subgraphs for some
ﬁxed value of n [107]. In either case, one can examine different superfamilies to help understand the
role that speciﬁc motifs (or subgraphs) or sets of motifs (or subgraphs) may have in potentially similar
functions of networks in a given superfamily.
Subgraphs, motifs and superfamilies have been examined in several studies that applied network
analysis to granular materials [80, 108–110]. They have revealed interesting insights into the deformation
and reconﬁguration that occurs in granular systems for different types of loading conditions and external
perturbations. We discuss these ideas further in Sections 3.1.4 and 3.3.3.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

501

Q=


[Wij − γ Pij ]δ(gi , gj ),

(2.21)

i,j

where gi is the community assignment of node i and gj is the community assignment of node j, and where
the Kronecker delta δ(gi , gj ) = 1 if gi = gj and δ(gi , gj ) = 0 otherwise. The quantity γ is a resolution
parameter that adjusts the relative average sizes of communities [124, 125], where smaller values of γ
favor larger communities and larger values of γ favor smaller communities [126]. The element Pij is the
expected weight of the edge between node i and node j under a speciﬁed null model. In many contexts,
the most common choice is to determine the null-model matrix elements Pij from the Newman–Girvan
(NG) null model [118, 127, 128], for which
PijNG =

si sj
,
2m

(2.22)


where si =
j Wij is the strength (and, for unweighted networks, the degree ki ) of node i and m =

1
W
is
the
total edge weight (and, for unweighted networks, the total number of edges) in the
ij
i,j
2
network. There are several other null models, which are usually based on a random-graph model, and
they can incorporate system features (such as spatial information) in various ways [129]. In the next
part of this subsubsection, we discuss a physically-motivated null model that is particularly useful for
studying granular force networks.
Maximizing Q is NP-hard [130], so it is necessary to use computational heuristics to identify nearoptimal partitions of a network into communities of nodes [124]. Two well-known choices are the Louvain
[131] and the Louvain-like [132] locally greedy algorithms, which begin by placing all nodes in their own
community, and they then iteratively agglomerate nodes when the resulting partition increases modularity.
Because of the extreme near degeneracy of the modularity landscape (a very large number of different
partitions can have rather similar values of the scalar Q), it is often useful to run such an algorithm many
times to construct an ensemble of partitions, over which one can average various properties to yield a
‘consensus’ description of community structure [126, 129, 133, 134].
Physical considerations. Community-detection tools, such as modularity maximization, have often been
applied to social, biological, and other networks [31, 32]. In applying these techniques to granular materials, however, it is important to keep in mind that the organization of particulate systems (such as the
arrangements of particles and forces in a material) is subject to signiﬁcant spatial and physical constraints,
which can severely impact the types of organization that can arise in a corresponding network representation of the material. When studying networks that are embedded in real space or constructed via some
kind of physical relation between elements, it is often crucial to consider the spatial constraints—and,
more generally, a system’s underlying physics—and their effects on network architecture [37]. Such considerations also impact how one should interpret network diagnostics such as path lengths and centrality
measures, the null models that one uses in procedures such as modularity maximization, and so on. The

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

approaches exist for studying community structure in networks. These include stochastic block models
(SBMs) and other methods for statistical inference (which are increasingly favored by many scholars)
[111], approaches based on random walks (e.g., InfoMap [120]), various methods for detecting local
community structure (see, e.g., [121, 122]), edge-based communities [123], and many others.
The goal of modularity maximization is to identify communities of nodes that are more densely (or
more strongly) interconnected with other nodes in the same community than expected with respect to
some null model. To do this, one maximizes a modularity objective function

502

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

(a) Newman–Girvan Null Model

(b)

Geographic Null Model

NG null model was constructed to be appropriate for networks in which a connection between any pair
of nodes is possible. Clearly, in granular materials—as in other spatially-embedded systems [37]—this
assumption is unphysical and therefore problematic.
Bassett et al. [126] deﬁned a null model that accounts explicitly for geographical (and hence spatial)
constraints in granular materials, in which each particle can contact only its nearest neighbours [27]. In
the context of granular networks with nodes representing particles and edges representing forces between
those particles, the geographical null model P in [126] has matrix elements
Pij = ρAij ,

(2.23)

where ρ is the mean edge weight in the network and A is the binary adjacency matrix of the network.
In this particular application, ρ = f :=  fij  is the mean inter-particle force. As we illustrate in Fig. 5,
modularity maximization with the geographical null model [Eq. (2.23)] produces different communities
than modularity maximization with the NG null model [Eq. (2.22)] [27, 112, 113].
Generalization of modularity maximization to multilayer networks. Although studying community structure in a given granular packing can provide important insights, one is also typically interested in how
such mesoscale structures reconﬁgure as a material experiences external perturbations, such as those
from applied compression or sheer. To examine these types of questions, one can optimize a multilayer
generalization of modularity to study multilayer granular force networks in which each layer represents
a network at a different step in the evolution of the system (for example, at different time steps or
at different packing fractions) [113]. In Fig. 6, we show a schematic of a multilayer construction that
has been employed in such investigations. See [36, 135] for reviews of multilayer networks (including
generalizations of this construction).
One way to detect multilayer communities in a network is to use a generalization of modularity
maximization [136], which was derived for multilayer networks with interlayer edges between nodes in
different layers that represent the same entity. For simplicity, we suppose that all edges are bidirectional.
One maximizes
Qmulti =

1 
[(Wijq − γq Pijq )δqr + ωjqr δij ]δ(giq , gjr ),
2η ijqr

(2.24)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 5. Modularity maximization with different null models can reveal distinct types of community structures in granular networks.
In a network representation in which particles are represented by nodes and contact forces are represented by weighted edges,
(a) using the NG null model helps uncover contiguous domains in a granular system, and (b) using a geographical null model on
the same network helps detect chain-like structures that are reminiscent of force chains. In both panels, nodes (i.e., particles) of the
same colour are assigned to the same community.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

503

where Wijq is the (i, j)th component of the qth layer of the adjacency tensor W [137] associated with
the multilayer network, Pijq is the (i, j)th component of the qth layer of the null-model tensor, γq is a
resolution parameter (sometimes called a structural resolution parameter) for layer q, and ωjqr is the
interlayer coupling between layers q and r. (In the context of multilayer representations of temporal
networks, if ωjqr = ω for all j, q and r, one can interpret ω as a temporal resolution parameter.) More
speciﬁcally, ωjqr is the strength of the coupling that links node j in layer q to itself in layer r. (This type
of interlayer edge, which occurs between nodes in different layers that represent the same entity, is called
a diagonal edge [36].) The quantities giq and gjr , respectively, are the community assignments
of node

i in layer q and node j in layer r. The intralayer
strength of node j in layer q is sjq = i Wijq , and the
interlayer strength of node j in layer q is ζjq = r ωjqr , so the multilayer
 strength of node j in layer q
is given by κjq = sjq + ζjq . Finally, the normalization factor η = 21 jq κjq is the total strength of the
adjacency tensor.5
Maximizing multilayer modularity [Eq. (2.24)] allows one to examine phenomena such as evolving
communities in time-dependent networks or communities that evolve with respect to some other parameter, and communities in networks with multiple types of edges. Capturing such behaviour has been
useful in many applications, including ﬁnancial markets [128], voting patterns [136], international relations [139], international migration [140], disease spreading [129], human brain dynamics [141–143] and
more. In the context of granular matter, multilayer community detection allows one to examine changes
in community structure of a force network, in which communities can either persist or reconﬁgure, with
respect to both particle content and the mean strength of nodes inside a community, due to applied loads
on a system.

5 In the study of multilayer networks, it is common to use the term ‘tensor’ to refer to a multidimensional array [36] (as is
common in some disciplines [138]), and proper tensorial structures have been explored brieﬂy in adjacency tensors [137].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 6. A schematic of a multilayer network with layer-dependent community structure. In this example, each layer represents
a static granular force network in which nodes (i.e., particles) are adjacent to one another via intralayer weighted edges (e.g.,
representing contact forces). Additionally, the same particle in consecutive layers is adjacent to itself via an interlayer edge of
uniform weight ω. For clarity, we only show two such couplings, but these interlayer edges exist for all particles (and between
all consecutive layers). One can extract communities that change across layers—for example, if layers represent time, these are
time-evolving communities—to study mesoscale organization in a granular system and to help understand how it reconﬁgures due
to external loading (such as compression). In this schematic, we use different colours to label the particles that belong to different
communities. Note that the same community can persist across several (or all) layers and reconﬁgure in terms of its constituent
particles and the mean strength of its nodes. We reproduced this ﬁgure, with permission, from [113].

504

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

2.2.9 Connected components and percolation. Sometimes it is possible to break a network into connected subgraphs called components (which we introduced brieﬂy in Section 2.2.2). A component, which
is sometimes called a cluster, is a subgraph GC of a graph G such that at least one path exists between each
pair of nodes in GC [29]. Components are maximal subsets in the sense that the addition of another node
of G to a component destroys the property of connectedness. An undirected graph is connected when it
consists of a single component. Networks with more than one component often have one component that
has many more nodes than the others, so there can be one large component and many small components.
One can ﬁnd the components of a graph using a breadth-ﬁrst search (BFS) algorithm [67], and one can
determine the number of components by counting the number of 0 eigenvalues of a graph’s combinatorial
Laplacian matrix [29]. To study graph components, one can also use methods from computational algebraic topology. Speciﬁcally, the zeroth Betti number β0 indicates the number of connected components
in a graph [153] (see Section 2.2.10).
Percolation theory [29, 154–156], which builds on ideas from subjects such as statistical physics and
probability theory, is often used to understand the emergence and behaviour of connected components
in a graph [52]. For example, in the traditional version of what is known as bond percolation (which is
also traditionally studied on a lattice rather than on a more general network) [157], edges are occupied
with probability p, and one examines quantities such as the size distributions of connected components
as one varies the parameter p, called the bond occupation probability. It is especially interesting to
determine a critical value pc , called the percolation threshold, at which there is a phase transition: below
pc , there is no percolating component (or cluster), which spans the system and connects opposite sides;
above pc , there is such a cluster [157, 158]. In the latter scenario, it is common to say that there is a
‘percolating network’. In percolation on more general networks, one can study how the size of the largest
component, as a fraction of the size of a network, changes with p. Related ideas also arise in the study
of components in Erdős–Rényi random graphs G(N, p), in which one considers an ensemble of N-node
graphs and p is the independent probability that an edge exists between any two nodes [29, 30, 159,
160]. In the limit N → ∞, the size of the LCC undergoes a phase transition at a critical probability
pc = 1/N. When p < pc , the ER graph in expectation does not have a giant connected component
(GCC); at p = pc , a GCC emerges whose size scales linearly with N for p > pc . Similarly, for bond
percolation on networks, a transition occurs at a critical threshold pc , such that for p > pc , there is a GCC

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

2.2.8 Flow networks. One can examine many natural and engineered systems—such as animal and
plant vasculature, fungi, and urban transportation networks [144–150]—from the perspective of ﬂow
networks (which are often directed) that transport a load (of ﬂuids, vehicles, and so on) along their edges.
It is of considerable interest to examine how to optimize ﬂow through a network [29, 151]. A well-known
result from optimization theory is the maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cut theorem [29, 151, 152]: for a suitable
notion of ﬂow and under suitable assumptions, the maximum ﬂow that can pass from a source node to
a sink node is given by the total weight of the edges in the minimum cut, which is the set of edges with
smallest total weight that, when removed, disconnect the source and the sink. A related notion, which
applies to networks in which there is some cost associated with transport along network edges, is that
of maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cost. In this context, one attempts to ﬁnd a route through a network that
maximizes ﬂow transmission from source to sink, while minimizing the cost of ﬂow along network edges
[151, 152]. The maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cut and maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cost problems are usually
examined under certain constraints, such as ﬂow conservation at each node and an upper bound (e.g.,
limited by a capacitance) on ﬂow through any edge. One can examine granular networks from such a
perspective by considering a ﬂow of force along a network formed by contacting grains. We discuss
relevant studies in Section 3.3.1.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

505

2.2.10 Methods from algebraic topology and computational topology. The tools that we have described
thus far rely on the notion of a dyad (i.e., a 2-node subgraph) as the fundamental unit of interest (see Fig. 7a).
However, recent work in algebraic topology and computational topology [153, 183–185] offers a complementary view, in which the fundamental building blocks that encode relationships between elements of
a system are k-simplices (each composed of k + 1 nodes), rather than simply nodes and dyadic relations
between them (see Fig. 7b). These structures can encode ‘higher-order’ interactions and can be very
useful for understanding the architecture and function of real-world networks (e.g., they yield a complementary way to examine mesoscale network features), and they have been insightful in the study of sensor
networks [186], contagion spreading [187], protein interactions [188], neuronal networks [51, 189], and
many other problems. See [190, 191] for further discussion and pointers to additional applications. The
discussion in [192] is also useful.
A collection of simplices that are joined in a compatible way is called a simplicial complex, which
is a generalization of a graph that can encode non-dyadic relations [185]. More precisely, and following
[51], we deﬁne an (abstract) simplicial complex X as a pair of sets: VX , called the vertices (or nodes);
and SX , called the simplices, each of which is a ﬁnite subset of VX , subject to the requirement that
if σ ∈ SX , then every subset τ of σ is also an element of SX . A simplex with k elements is called a
(k − 1)-simplex, and subsets τ ⊂ σ are called faces of σ . Using this notation, a 0-simplex is a node, a
1-simplex is an edge and its two incident nodes (i.e., a dyad), a 2-simplex is a ﬁlled triangle, and so on
(see Fig. 7b). One type of simplicial complex that can be used to encode the information in a graph is a
clique complex (sometimes also called a ﬂag complex); we show an example in Fig. 8. To construct the
clique complex of a graph G, one associates every k-clique (a complete—i.e., fully connected—subgraph
of k nodes) in G with a (k − 1)-simplex. One can thus think of building the clique complex of a graph G
as ‘ﬁlling in’ all of the k-cliques in G (see Fig. 7c). Note that we use the terms k-simplex and k-clique

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

(sometimes also called a ‘giant cluster’ or ‘percolating cluster’) whose size is a ﬁnite fraction of the total
number N of nodes as N → ∞ [29, 52]. When studying percolation on networks, quantities of interest
include the fraction of nodes in the LCC, the mean component size, the component-size distribution
and critical exponents that govern how these quantities behave just above the percolation threshold
[29, 158, 161].
We will see in Section 3 that it can be informative to use ideas from percolation theory to study the
organization of granular networks. For example, it is particularly interesting to examine how quantities
such as the number and size of connected components evolve with respect to packing density (or another
experimental parameter). [28, 73, 162–169]. Some studies have considered connectivity percolation
transitions, which are characterized by the appearance of a connected component that spans a system
(i.e., a percolating cluster, as reﬂected by an associated GCC in the inﬁnite-size limit of a network);
or rigidity percolation transitions, which can be used to examine the transition to jamming [170–177].
Rigidity percolation is similar to ordinary bond percolation (which is sometimes used to study connectivity
percolation), except that edges represent the presence of rigid bonds between network nodes [178, 179]
and one examines the emergence of rigid clusters in the system with respect to the fraction of occupied
bonds. One can also study percolation in force networks by investigating the formation of connected
components and the emergence of a percolating cluster of contacts as one varies a force threshold, which
is a threshold applied to a force-weighted adjacency matrix (representing contact forces between particles)
to convert it to a binary adjacency matrix [73, 163–169, 176, 180–182]. (See Section 3.2.4 for additional
discussion.) However, it is important to note that when studying networks of ﬁnite size, one needs to be
careful with claims about GCCs and percolation phase transitions, which are well-deﬁned mathematically
only in the limit of inﬁnite system size.

506

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 7. Algebraic topology and clique complexes. (a) An interaction in a graph is a dyad (i.e., a 2-node subgraph) or a node and
a self-edge. (b) An alternative fundamental unit is a k-simplex. A 0-simplex is a node, a 1-simplex is an edge, a 2-simplex is a
ﬁlled triangle, and so on. (c) A collection of k-simplices is called a simplicial complex, and one type of simplicial complex that
can be used to encode the information in a graph is a clique complex (sometimes also called a ﬂag complex). One constructs a
clique complex by taking every k-clique (a complete subgraph of k nodes) in a graph G to be a simplex of the same number of
nodes. (d) An interesting feature that can occur in a simplicial complex is a cycle, which is a closed arrangement of a collection
of k-simplices. The purple edges in the upper object indicate a one-dimensional cycle that encloses a region ﬁlled in by simplices,
whereas the purple edges in the lower object indicate a one-dimensional cycle that encloses a hole. (e) One can use a ﬁltration
to decompose a weighted graph into a sequence of binary graphs. For example, if one uses edge weight as a ﬁltration parameter,
one can represent a weighted graph as a sequence of unweighted graphs, which in turn yields a sequence of unweighted clique
complexes. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [57].

because they are standard, but it is important not to confuse the use of k in this context with the use of k
as the (also standard) notation for node degree.
One important feature of a simplicial complex is the potential presence of cycles.6 A cycle can consist
of any number of nodes, and a k-dimensional cycle is deﬁned as a closed arrangement of k-simplices,
such that a cycle has an empty boundary7 . For example, Fig. 7d illustrates a closed arrangement of
1-simplices (i.e., edges) that forms a one-dimensional cycle. It important to distinguish between cycles
that encircle a region that is ﬁlled by simplices with cycles that enclose a void (which is often called a
‘hole’ for the case of one-dimensional cycles). For example, the set of purple edges in the object in the
upper portion of Fig. 7d constitutes a one-dimensional cycle that surrounds a region ﬁlled by 2-simplices
(i.e., ﬁlled triangles), whereas the set of purple edges in the object in the lower portion of Fig. 7d constitutes
a one-dimensional cycle that encloses a hole.
Characterizing the location and prevalence of void-enclosing cycles in the clique complex of a network representation of a granular packing can offer fascinating insights into the packing’s structure [163].
One way to do this is by computing topological invariants such as Betti numbers [153, 165, 183]. The kth

6

Although we use the term cycle, which is standard in algebraic topology, note that this concept of a cycle is distinct from
(though related to) the standard network-science use of the word ‘cycle’ (see Section 2.2.3). The latter is sometimes called a circuit,
a term that we will use occasionally for clarity (especially given our focus on connected graphs).
7 The precise mathematical deﬁnition of a cycle requires a more detailed presentation than what we include in our present
discussion. For more information and further details from a variety of perspectives, see [153, 183, 185, 188, 190, 192–194].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

(e)

GRANULAR NETWORKS

507

8

In the literature, it is common to abuse terminology and refer to an equivalence class of k-dimensional cycles simply as a
k-dimensional cycle.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Betti number βk counts the number of inequivalent k-dimensional cycles that enclose a void, where two
k-dimensional cycles are equivalent if they differ by a boundary of a collection of (k + 1)-simplices.
In other words, the kth Betti number βk counts the number of non-trivial equivalence classes of
k-dimensional cycles and can thus also be interpreted as counting the number of voids (i.e., ‘holes’
of dimension k).8 The zeroth Betti number β0 gives the number of connected components in a network,
the ﬁrst Betti number β1 gives the number of inequivalent one-dimensional cycles that enclose a void (i.e.,
it indicates loops), the second Betti number β2 gives the number of inequivalent 2D cycles that enclose
a void (i.e., it indicates cavities), and so on.
Another useful way to examine the topological features that are determined by equivalence classes
of k-dimensional cycles (i.e., components, loops, cavities, and so on) is to compute persistent homology
(PH) of a network. For example, to compute PH for a weighted graph, one can ﬁrst decompose it into a
sequence of binary graphs. One way to do this is to begin with the empty graph and add one edge at a
time in order of decreasing edge weights (see Fig. 7e). More formally and following [189], this process
can translate information about edge weights into a sequence of binary graphs as an example of what is
called a ﬁltration [185, 190]. The sequence G0 ⊂ G1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ G|E | of unweighted graphs begins with the
empty graph G0 , and one adds a single edge at a time (or multiple edges, if some edges have the same
weight) in order from largest edge weight to smallest edge weight. (One can also construct ﬁltrations in
other ways.) Constructing a sequence of unweighted graphs in turn yields a sequence of clique complexes
[195], allowing one to examine equivalence classes of cycles as one varies the edge weight θ (or another
ﬁltration parameter). Important values of θ include the weight θbirth associated with the ﬁrst graph in which
an equivalence class (i.e., a topological feature) occurs (i.e., its birth coordinate) and the edge weight
θdeath associated with the ﬁrst graph in which the feature disappears (i.e., its death coordinate), such as
by being ﬁlled in with higher-dimensional simplices or by merging with an older feature. One potential
marker of the relative importance of a particular feature (a component, a loop, and so on) in the clique
complex is how long it persists, as quantiﬁed by its lifetime θbirth − θdeath (although short-lived features can
also be meaningful [190, 192]). A large lifetime indicates robust features that persist over many values
of a ﬁltration parameter. Persistence diagrams (PDs) are one useful way to visualize the evolution of
k-dimensional cycles with respect to a ﬁltration parameter. PDs encode birth and death coordinates of
features as a collection of persistence points (θbirth , θdeath ) in a planar region. One can construct a PD for
each Betti number: a β0 PD (denoted by PD0 ) encodes the birth and death of components in a network,
a β1 PD (denoted by PD1 ) encodes the birth and death of loops and so on.
To demonstrate some key aspects of a ﬁltration, the birth and death of topological features, and PDs,
we borrow and adapt an example from Kramár et al. [165]. Consider the small granular force network
in Fig. 8a; the nodes represent particles in a 2D granular packing, and the coloured edges represent
the magnitude of the inter-particle forces (of which there are four distinct values) between contacting
particles. In a 2D system like this one, the only relevant Betti numbers are β0 and β1 , as all others are 0.
In Fig. 8b, we show the ﬂag complex (which is essentially the same as a clique complex [190]) of the
granular network, where the colour of a triangle indicates the value corresponding to the minimum force
along any of its edges. Computing PH on a ﬂag complex (which has been done in several studies of
PH in granular force networks [164–169]) only counts loops that include four or more particles. That is,
it does not count 3-particle loops (which are sometimes called ‘triangular loops’). Loops with four or
more particles are associated with defects, as they would not exist in a collection of monosized disks that

508

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

(a)

(d)

(g)

(e)

(f)

(h)

Fig. 8. An example force network, an associated ﬁltration over the ﬂag complex (i.e., clique complex), and PDs. (a) In the force
network, coloured edges represent the magnitude of the force between contacting particles, which are represented as nodes in the
network. In order from smallest to largest, the four values of the force are θ1 (dark blue), θ2 , (cyan), θ3 (green), and θ4 (red). (b)
The ﬂag complex is formed by ﬁlling in all 3-particle loops (i.e., triangular loops) with the smallest value of the force along any
of its edges. Deﬁning a ﬁltration over the ﬂag complex avoids counting these 3-particle loops. (c–f) The sequence of complexes
corresponding to the ﬁltration over the ﬂag complex; one obtains the sequence by descending the four levels of the force threshold
θ . (g) The β0 persistence diagram PD0 . (h) The β1 persistence diagram PD1 . We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [165].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

(c)

(b)

GRANULAR NETWORKS

509

2.3 Some considerations when using network-based methods
Because there are many methods that one can use to analyse granular networks and many quantities
that one can compute to measure properties of these networks, it is useful to discuss some relationships,
similarities and distinctions between them. Naturally, the meaning of any given network feature depends
on how the network itself is deﬁned, so we focus the present discussion on the most common representation of a granular system as a network. (See Section 3.3 for discussions of other representations.) In
this representation (see Fig. 2), nodes correspond to particles and edges correspond to contacts between
particles. Additionally, edge weights can represent quantities such as normal or tangential forces between
particles. In this type of granular network, it is important to be aware of which network quantities explicitly take into account spatial information or physical constraints in a system, which consider only network
topology, and which consider only network geometry (i.e., both topology and edge weights, but not other
information). Granular materials have a physical nature and are embedded in real space, so such considerations are extremely important. For discussions of how these issues manifest in spatial networks more
generally, see [37].
One way to explicitly include spatial or physical information into network analysis is to calculate quantities that are deﬁned from some kind of distance (e.g., a Euclidean distance between nodes),
whether directly or through a latent metric space, rather than a hop distance. For example, as discussed
in Section 2.2.2, one can deﬁne the edge length between two adjacent nodes from the physical distance

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

are packed perfectly and as densely as possible into a ‘crystalline’ structure (which has only triangular
loops) [165].
In Fig. 8c–f, we show the sequence of complexes that correspond to the ﬁltration over the ﬂag complex.
One descends the four threshold levels (i.e., edge weights), beginning with the largest (θ4 ) and ending with
the smallest (θ1 ). In Fig. 8g and h, we show the corresponding PDs for β0 and β1 . It is helpful to discuss a
few features of these diagrams. In PD0 , we observe four points that are born at θ4 ; these points correspond
to the four connected components that emerge at the ﬁrst level of the ﬁltration in Fig. 8c. Two of the
components merge into one component at θ3 (see Fig. 8d); this corresponds to the point at (θ4 , θ3 ). A new
component forms at θ3 and dies at θ2 ; this is represented by the point at (θ3 , θ2 ) (see Fig. 8d). Additionally,
two components born at θ4 die at θ2 , corresponding to the two points at (θ4 , θ2 ). One can continue this
process until the end of the ﬁltration, where there is just a single connected component (see Fig. 8f). This
component is born at θ4 ; it persists for all thresholds, and we use Kramár et al. [165]’s convention to give
it a death coordinate of −1; this yields the persistence point at (θ4 , −1). In PD1 , we observe that a loop
emerges at θ3 (see Fig. 8d), and it is then ﬁlled by triangles at θ2 (see Fig. 8e), leading to the point at
(θ3 , θ2 ). Three more loops are born at θ2 and never die (see Fig. 8e); again using the convention in [165],
we assign these features a death coordinate of 0, so there are three persistence points at (θ2 , 0). Finally,
one more loop appears at θ1 and does not die (see Fig. 8e); this is represented by a point at (θ1 , 0).
Kramár et al. [165] gave an in-depth exposition of how to apply PH to granular networks, and we refer
interested readers to this article for more information. Because studying PH is a general mathematical
approach, it can be applied to different variations of force networks and can also be used on networks
constructed from different types of experimental data (e.g., digital image data, particle-position data or
particle-interaction data). Kramár et al. [165] also discussed a set of measures that can be used to compare
and contrast the homology of force networks both within a single system (e.g., at two different packing
fractions) and across different systems (e.g., if one uses particles of different sizes or shapes), and they
explored the robustness of PH computations to noise and numerical errors. In Section 3.2.5, we further
discuss applications of methods from algebraic and computational topology to granular materials.

510

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

3. Granular materials as networks
We now review network-based models and approaches for studying granular materials. Over the past
decade, network analysis has provided a novel view of the structure and dynamics of granular systems,
insightfully complementing and extending traditional perspectives. See [1–5] for reviews of non-network
approaches.
Perhaps the greatest advantages of using network representations and associated tools are their natural
ability to (1) capture and quantify the complex and intrinsic heterogeneity that manifests in granular
materials (e.g., in the form of force chains) and to (2) systematically and quantitatively investigate how the
structure and organization of a granular system changes when subjected to external loads or perturbations
(such as compression, shear, or tapping). In particular, network science and related subjects provide a set of
tools that help quantify structure (and changes in structure) over a range of scales—including local, direct
interactions between neighbouring particles; larger, mesoscale collections of particles that can interact and
reconﬁgure via more complicated patterns; and system-wide measurements of material (re)organization. It
is thought that local, intermediate, and system-wide scales are all important for regulating emergent, bulk
properties of granular systems, but it can be difﬁcult to obtain a holistic, multiscale understanding of these
materials. For example, particle-level approaches may not take into account collective organization that
occurs on slightly larger scales, and continuum models and approaches that rely on averaging techniques
may be insensitive to interesting and important material inhomogeneities [42–44, 46].
Network representations also provide a ﬂexible medium for modeling different types of granular
materials (and other particulate matter). For example, network analysis is useful for both simulation
and experimental data of granular materials, and methods from complex systems and network science
can help improve understanding of both dense, quasistatically-deforming materials as well as granular
ﬂows. In any of these cases, one often seeks to understand how a system evolves over the course of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

between them, which allows quantities such as mean shortest path length, efﬁciency and some centrality measures to directly incorporate spatial information. However, traditional network features such as
degree and clustering coefﬁcient depend only on network connectivity, although their values are inﬂuenced by spatial effects. In Section 2.2.7, we also saw that one can incorporate physical constraints from
granular networks into community-detection methods by using a geographical null model, rather than
the traditional NG null model, in modularity maximization.
Different computations in network analysis can also probe different spatial, topological or geometrical scales. For example, measures such as degree, strength and clustering coefﬁcients are local measures
that quantify information about the immediate neighbourhood of a node. However, measures such as the
mean shortest path length and global efﬁciency are global in nature, as they probe large-scale network
organization. In between these extremes are mesoscale structures. A network-based framework can be
very helpful for probing various types of intermediate-scale structures, ranging from very small ones (e.g.,
motifs, such as small cycles) to larger ones (e.g., communities) and tools such as PH were designed to
reveal robust structural features across multiple scales. Crucially, although there are some clear qualitative
similarities and differences between various network-analysis tools (and there are some known quantitative relationships between some of them [29]), it is a major open issue to achieve a precise understanding
of the relationships between different network computations. Moreover, in spatially-embedded systems
(as in any situation where there are additional constraints) one can also expect some ordinarily distinct
quantities to become more closely related to each other [37]. Furthermore, the fact that a granular particle
occupies a volume in space (volume exclusion) gives constraints beyond what arises from embeddedness
in a low-dimensional space.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

511

3.1 Contact networks
A contact network is perhaps the simplest way to represent a granular system. Such networks (as well
as the term ‘contact network’) were used to describe granular packings long before explicitly network
science-based approaches were employed to study granular materials; see, for example, [198, 199]. The
structure of a contact network encodes important information about a material’s mechanical properties.
As its name suggests, a contact network embodies the physical connectivity and contact structure of the
particles in a packing (see Fig. 2). In graph-theoretic terms, each particle in the packing is represented as a
node, and an edge exists between any two particles that are in physical contact with one another. Note that
it may not always be possible to experimentally determine which particles are in physical contact, and
one may need to approximate contacts between particles using information about particle positions, radii,
and inter-particle distances. (See Section 3.5 for details.) By deﬁnition (and however it is constructed),
a contact network is unweighted and undirected, and it can thus be described with an unweighted and
undirected adjacency matrix (see Section 2.1):

1, if particles i and j are in contact,
Aij =
(3.1)
0, otherwise.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

an experiment or simulation. To study such dynamics, one can examine a network representation of a
system as one varies a relevant physical quantity that parameterizes the system evolution. For example,
for a granular system in which the packing fraction increases in small steps as the material is compressed
quasistatically, one can extract a network representation of the system at each packing fraction during
the compression process and then study how various features of that network representation change as
the packing fraction increases. Even a particular type of granular system is amenable to multiple types
of network representations, which can probe different aspects of the material and how it evolves under
externally applied loads. For instance, one can build networks based only on knowledge of the locations
of particles (which, in some cases, may be the only information available) or by considering the presence
or absence of physical contacts between particles.
If one knows additional information about the elements in a system or about their interactions, one
can construct more complicated network representations of it. For example, it has long been known
that granular materials exhibit highly heterogeneous patterns of force transmission, with a small subset
of the particles carrying a majority of the load along force chains [196, 197]. Recall from Section 1
that, broadly speaking, a force chain (which is also sometimes called a force network) is a set of
contacts that carry a load that is larger than the mean load [8, 16], and the mean orientation of a
force chain often encodes the direction of the applied stress [17]. We illustrated an example of forcechain structure in Fig. 1, and we further discuss force-chain organization in Section 3.2. Because
of the nature of the distribution of force values and the interesting way in which forces are spatially distributed in a material, it is often very useful to consider network representations of granular
materials that take into account information about inter-particle forces (see Section 3.2) and to use
network-based methods that allow one to quantitatively investigate how the structure of a force network
changes when one includes only contacts that carry at least some threshold force (see Sections 3.2.4
and 3.2.5).
In our ensuing discussion, we describe several network constructions that have been used to study
granular materials, indicate how they have been investigated using many of the concepts and diagnostics
introduced in Section 2.2, and review how these studies have improved scientiﬁc understanding of the
underlying, complex physics of granular systems.

512

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Because the organization of a contact network depends on and is constrained by the radii of the
particles and their locations in Euclidean space, a contact network is a spatially-embedded graph [37].
In Section 3.2.2, we will see that this embedding in physical space has important consequences for the
extraction of force-chain structures via community-detection techniques (see Section 2.2.7). In Fig. 9,
we show an example of a contact network generated from a discrete element method (DEM) simulation
(see Section 3.5) of biaxial compression [200]. The granular system in this ﬁgure is polydisperse, as it
has more than two types of particles. (In this case, the particles have different sizes.) If all particles are
identical in a granular system, it is called monodisperse; if there are two types of particles in a system, it is
called bidisperse. In practice, although the presence or absence of a contact is deﬁnitive only in computer
simulations, one can set reasonable thresholds and perform similar measurements in experiments [201]
(see Section 3.5). It is also important to note that packing geometry and the resulting contact network do
not completely deﬁne a granular system on their own. In particular, one can associate a given geometrical
arrangement of particles with several conﬁgurations of inter-particle forces that satisfy force and torque
balance constraints and the boundary conditions of a system [202–205]. This is a crucial concept to
keep in mind when conducting investigations based only on contact networks, and it also motivates the
inclusion of contact forces to construct more complete network representations of granular systems (see
Section 3.2).
In the remainder of this subsection, we review some of the network-based approaches for characterizing contact networks of granular materials and how these approaches have been used to help understand
the physical behaviour of granular matter. We primarily label the following subsubsections according
to the type of employed methodology. However, we also include some subsubsections about speciﬁc
applications to certain systems.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 9. An example of a contact network from a DEM simulation of a densely-packed 2D system of polydisperse, disk-shaped
particles. In this case, the granular material was subjected to biaxial compression and constrained to move along a plane. This
snapshot corresponds to a network at an axial strain before full shear-band formation. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission,
from [58].

GRANULAR NETWORKS

513

Z ≥ 2d ≡ Ziso .

(3.2)

The isostatic number Ziso indicates the condition for isostaticity, which is deﬁned as the minimum contact
number that is needed for mechanical stability. One can use the coordination number (which is often
tuned by changing the packing fraction φ) as an order parameter to describe the jamming transition for
frictionless spheres in 2D and 3D [63, 64, 207]. Speciﬁcally, there is a critical packing fraction φc such
that below φc , the contact number for these systems is Z = 0 (i.e. there are no load-bearing contacts),
and at the critical packing fraction φc , the contact number jumps to the critical value Zc = Ziso = 2d.
One can also generalize the use of the coordination number in order to examine mechanical stability and
jamming in granular systems of frictional spheres. In these systems, the condition for stability is
m
,
Z ≥ Ziso
m
Ziso
≡ (d + 1) +

2Nm
,
d

(3.3)

where Nm is the mean number of contacts per particle that have tangential forces ft equal to the so-called
Coulomb threshold—that is, Nm is the mean number of contacts per particle with ft = μfn , where μ is the
m
coefﬁcient of friction and fn is the normal force [64, 207, 208]—and Ziso
again designates the condition for
isostaticity. Results from experimental systems have demonstrated that contact number also characterizes
the jamming transition in frictional, photoelastic disks [201].
The coordination number has been studied for several years in the context of granular materials
and jamming, and it is fruitful to connect it directly with ideas from network science. Several recent
studies have formalized the notion of a contact network, and they deliberately modeled granular systems
as such networks to take advantage of tools like those described in Section 2.2. Such investigations of
contact networks allow one to go beyond the coordination number and further probe the rich behaviour
and properties of granular materials—including stability and the jamming transition [63], force chains
[8, 9, 16], and acoustic propagation [21, 23, 42, 45].
Perhaps the simplest expansion of investigations into the role of the coordination number is the study
of the degree distribution P(k) of the contact network of a packing. Calculating degree distributions can
provide potential insights into possible generative mechanisms of a graph [29, 158], although one has

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

3.1.1 Coordination number and node degree. One can study a contact network in several ways to
investigate different features of a granular system. We begin our discussion by associating the mean
node degree of a contact network with the familiar and well-studied coordination number (i.e., contact
number) Z. Although early investigations of granular materials did not consciously make this connection,
the mean degree and coordination number are synonymous quantities. The contact degree ki of particle i is
the number of particles with which i is directly in contact, and one can calculate it easily from an adjacency
matrix [see Eq. (2.5)]. A contact network is undirected, so its adjacency matrix A is symmetric, and its row
sum and column sum each yield a vector of node degrees. The mean degree k of a contact network [see
Eq. (2.7)] is then the mean coordination number (i.e., contact number) Z, and it gives the mean number of
contacts per particle. As we noted previously (see Section 2.2.1), Z is an important quantity in granular
systems because of its connection with mechanical stability and rigidity—which, loosely speaking, is
the ability of a system to withstand deformations—and its characterization of the jamming transition
[63, 206] and other mechanical properties. In particular, the condition for mechanical stability—that is,
the condition to have all translational and rotational degrees of freedom constrained so that there is force
and torque balance—in a packing of frictionless spheres in d dimensions [61, 63, 64, 206, 207] is

514

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

(a)

(b)

(c)

to be very careful to avoid over-interpreting the results of such calculations [209]. In granular physics,
it has been observed that the degree distribution of a contact network can track changes in network
topology past the jamming transition in isotropically compressed simulations of a 2D granular system
[73]. Speciﬁcally, the peak of P(k) shifts from a lower value of k to a higher value of k near the transition.
Moreover, changes in the mean degree k and its standard deviation can anticipate the onset of different
stages of deformation in DEM simulations (i.e., molecular-dynamics simulations) of granular systems
under various biaxial compression tests [58, 210].
3.1.2 Investigating rigidity of a granular system using a contact network. An important area of research
in granular materials revolves around attempts to (1) understand how different types of systems respond
when perturbed, and (2) determine what features of a system improve its integrity under such perturbations.
As we noted in Section 3.1.1, it is well-known that coordination number (and hence node degree) is a key
quantity for determining mechanical stability and understanding jamming in granular materials. However,
contact networks obviously have many other structural features, and examining them can be very helpful
for providing a more complete picture of these systems.
To the best of our knowledge, the stability of granular materials was ﬁrst studied from a graph-theoretic
standpoint in the context of structural rigidity theory [172, 179, 211], which has also been applied to
amorphous solids more generally [62]. In structural rigidity theory, thought to have been studied originally
by Maxwell [212], rods of ﬁxed length are connected to one another by hinges, and one considers the
conditions under which the associated structural graphs are able to resist deformations and support applied
loads (see Fig. 10). A network is said to be minimally rigid (or isostatic) when it has exactly the number
of bars needed for rigidity. This occurs when the number of constraints is equal to the number of degrees
of freedom in the system (i.e., when Laman’s minimal-rigidity criterion is satisﬁed). The network is
ﬂexible if there are too few rods, and it is overconstrained (i.e., self-stressed) if there are more rods than
needed for minimal rigidity. Triangles are the smallest isostatic structures in two dimensions [213–215];
there are no allowed motions of these structures that preserve the lengths and connectivity of the bars, so
triangles (i.e., 3-cycles) do not continuously deform due to an applied force. In comparison, 4-cycles are
structurally ﬂexible and can continuously deform from one conﬁguration to another while preserving the
lengths and connectivity of the rods (see Fig. 10).
Extending a traditional network of rods and hinges, concepts from structural rigidity theory yield
interesting insights into contact networks of particulate matter. See [216] for a discussion of some of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 10. Some ideas from structural rigidity theory. (a) An example of a 3-cycle and a 4-cycle that one can examine using concepts
from structural rigidity theory by considering the edges to be rods of ﬁxed length that are connected to one another by rotating
hinges. (b) Triangular structures are rigid under a variety of applied forces (represented as red arrows), whereas (c) squares can
deform under such perturbations. By Laman’s theorem, a 2D network with N nodes is minimally rigid if it has exactly 2N − 3
edges, and each of its subgraphs satisﬁes the analogous constraint (so an Ñ-node subgraph has no more than 2Ñ − 3 edges). The
network in panel (b) satisﬁes this criterion, but the network in panel (c) does not.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

515

3.1.3 Exploring the role of cycles. We now consider the role of circuits (i.e., the conventional network
notion of cycles, which we discussed in Section 2.2.3) in granular contact networks. Cycles in a contact
network can play crucial stabilizing roles in several situations. Speciﬁcally, as we will discuss in detail
in this section, simulations (and some experiments) suggest that (1) odd cycles (especially 3-cycles)
can provide stability to granular materials by frustrating rotation among grains and by providing lateral
support to surrounding particles, and that (2) a contact network loses these stabilizing structures as the
corresponding granular system approaches failure.
Noting that 3-cycles are the smallest arrangement of particles that can support (via force balance)
a variety of 2D perturbations to a compressive load without deforming the contact structure, Smart and
Ottino [81] studied the effects of friction and tilting on the evolution of contact-loop organization in a
granular bed. In their simulations, they implemented tilting by incrementally increasing the angle of a
gravity vector with respect to the vertical direction, while preserving the orientation of the granular bed
and maintaining quasistatic conditions. In untilted granular packings, they observed that lowering interparticle friction yields networks with a higher density of 3-cycles and 4-cycles, where they deﬁned the
‘density’ of an l-cycle to be the number of l-cycles divided by the total number of particles. By examining
the contact network as they varied tilting angle, Smart and Ottino [81] also observed that the density of
4-cycles increases prior to failure—likely due to the fracture of stabilizing 3-cycles—and that this trend
was distinguishable from changes in the coordination number alone.
Cycles have also been studied in the context of DEM simulations of dense, 2D granular assemblies
subject to quasistatic, biaxial compression [58, 84, 210, 218]. In many of these studies, the setup consists

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

the earliest applications of such ideas to disordered systems and granular materials. Moukarzel [217]
used structural rigidity theory to derive conditions for the isostaticity of a granular packing, and he
tied the fact that random packings of particles tend to be isostatic to the origin of instabilities in granular piles. Later, similar concepts were used to show that in granular networks, cycles with an even
number of edges allow contacting grains to roll without slipping when subject to shear; however, these
relative rotations are ‘frustrated’ in cycles with an odd number of edges, so such cycles can act as
stabilizing structures in a network [85]. Several later studies (such as [58, 73, 79–81, 83, 84, 210, 218–
220]) have conﬁrmed that contact loops are often stabilizing mesoscale features in a contact network
of a granular material. We speciﬁcally consider the role of cycles in granular contact networks in
Section 3.1.3.
Another type of network approach for understanding rigidity in granular systems is rigidity percolation [178, 179, 211] (see Section 2.2.9). Feng [170] conducted an early investigation of an idealized
version of bond percolation in a granular context. It is now known that hallmarks of this bond-percolation
transition occur below isostaticity: Shen et al. [175] identiﬁed that a percolating (i.e., system-spanning)
cluster of non-load-bearing contacts forms at a packing density below the jamming point. One can
also use a rigidity-percolation approach to examine if a network is both percolating and rigid (see
Section 2.2.9). Note that a rigid granular network is also percolating, but a percolating network need
not be rigid. Rigidity percolation relies on tabulating local constraints via a pebble game [172], which
reveals connected, rigid regions (sometimes called ‘rigid clusters’) in a network. In a series of articles
[221–224] on simulated packings, Schwarz and co-workers went beyond Laman’s minimal-rigidity criterion to investigate local versus global rigidity in a network, the size distribution of rigid clusters, the
important role of spatial correlations, and the necessity of force balance. Building on the above work,
[177] recently utilized a rigidity-percolation approach to identify ﬂoppy versus rigid regions in slowlysheared granular materials and to characterize the nature of the phase transition from an underconstrained
system to a rigid network. See also the recent article [225].

516

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

of a collection of disks in 2D that are compressed slowly at a constant strain rate in the vertical direction,
while allowed to expand under constant conﬁning pressure in the horizontal direction [58, 84, 218]. In
another variation of boundary-driven biaxial compression, a sample can be compressed with a constant
volume but a varying conﬁning pressure [210]. Before describing speciﬁcs of the network analysis for
these systems, it is important to note that for the previously described conditions, the axial strain increases
in small increments (i.e., ‘steps’) as compression proceeds, and one can extract the inter-particle contacts
and forces at each strain value during loading to examine the evolution of a system with respect to
strain. Additionally, these systems undergo a change in behaviour from a solid-like state to a liquid-like
state, and they are characterized by different regimes of deformation as one increases axial strain [200]. In
particular, the granular material ﬁrst undergoes a period of strain hardening, followed by strain softening,
after which it enters a critical state. In the strain-hardening regime, the system is stable and the shear
stress increases monotonically with axial strain up to a peak value. After the peak shear stress, strain
softening sets in; this state is marked by a series of steep drops in the shear stress that indicate reduced
load-carrying capacity. Finally, in the critical state, a persistent shear band has fully formed, and the shear
stress ﬂuctuates around a steady-state value. The shear band is a region of localized deformation and
provides one signature of material failure [226]. Inside the shear band, force chains can both form and
buckle [227]. One can also associate increases in the energy dissipation rate of the system with particle
rearrangements (such as those that occur during force-chain buckling) and loss of stability in the material.
Examining the temporal evolution of cycles in such an evolving granular contact network can reveal
important information about changes that occur in a material during deformation. Using DEM simulations
(see the previous paragraph), Tordesillas et al. [84] computed the total number of cycles of different lengths
in a minimal cycle basis (see Section 2.2.3) of a contact network at each strain state during loading, and
they observed that there are many more 3-cycles and 4-cycles than longer cycles in the initial, solid-like
state of the system. However, as axial strain increases and one approaches the maximum shear stress,
the total number of 3-cycles falls off steeply. (The same is true for 4-cycles, though the effect is less
dramatic.) Additionally, during axial-strain steps (i.e., axial-strain ‘intervals’) corresponding to drops in
shear stress, Tordesillas et al. [84] observed large increases in the number of 3-cycles and 4-cycles that
open up to become longer cycles. In Fig. 11a, we show an example of the evolution of cycle organization
with increasing axial strain for a subset of particles from a DEM simulation of a granular material
under biaxial compression carried out by Walker and Tordesillas [58]. The authors observed that in this
system, both the global clustering coefﬁcient C [see Eq. (2.13)] and the mean subgraph centrality Y [see
Eq. (2.19)] decrease with increasing axial strain, drop sharply at peak shear stress, and then level out (see
Fig. 11b and c). Recalling that C is a measure of triangle density in a graph and that subgraph centrality
measures participation of nodes in closed walks (with more weight given to shorter paths), these results
also imply that the loss of small cycles co-occurs with the deformation and failure of a system due to
increasing load. Walker and Tordesillas [58] also computed the network bipartivity R [95] of the contact
network to quantify the contribution to mean subgraph centrality Y from closed walks of even length [see
Eq. 2.20]. They observed that R increases with increasing axial strain, revealing that closed walks of even
length become more prevalent during loading (see Fig. 11c). The authors suggested that this trend may
be due to a decrease in the prevalence of 3-cycles (which are stabilizing, as discussed in Section 2.2.3
and elsewhere). Tordesillas et al. [218] also examined the stability of cycles of various lengths in both
DEM simulations and experimental data, and they observed that, during loading, 3-cycles tend to be more
stable (as quantiﬁed by a measure of stability based on a structural-mechanics framework [228]) than
cycles of other lengths in a minimal cycle basis of the network.
Minimal cycle bases and the easier-to-compute subgraph centrality have also been used to examine
ﬂuctuations in kinetic energy in simulations of deforming sand. Walker et al. [79] computed a minimal

GRANULAR NETWORKS

517

cycle basis and then constructed cycle-participation vectors (see Section 2.2.3) from a contact network
after each strain step (i.e., at each strain state) during loading. They observed that temporal changes in the
cycle-participation vectors of the particles between consecutive strain steps are correlated positively with
temporal changes in kinetic energy over those steps. They also observed that large values in the temporal
changes of particle cycle-participation vectors and particle subgraph centrality occur in the shear-band
region. Walker et al. [80] also studied a minimal cycle basis and corresponding cycle-participation vectors
to examine structural transitions in a 3D experimental granular system of hydrogel spheres under uniaxial
compression. As pointed out in [79], developing quantitative predictors that are based on topological
information alone is extremely important for understanding how failure and rearrangements occur in
systems in which energy or force measurements are not possible.
Examining cycles in contact networks can also shed light on the behaviour of force chains. The
stability, load-bearing capacity, and buckling of force chains depend on neighbouring particles (so-called

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 11. Evolution of cycles in a deforming granular material. (a) One can track a subset of particles and their corresponding contact
network from a DEM simulation for increasing axial strain values |ε22 |. The system consists of 5098 spherical, polydisperse particles
that were subjected to a quasistatic, biaxial compression test. At the smallest displayed axial strain, the set of particles in this ﬁgure
yields a network that is composed of 3-cycles and 4-cycles. During loading, contacts are lost and longer cycles arise until only a
single 9-cycle remains. (b) One way to quantify these structural changes is by calculating the global clustering coefﬁcient C (solid
curve), which undergoes a sharp drop at peak stress, signifying the onset of material failure. (The dashed curve shows the standard
deviation of the distribution of local clustering coefﬁcients Ci ). (c) A decrease in mean subgraph centrality Y (solid curve) also
illustrates the loss of short cycles during deformation. More speciﬁcally, the mean network bipartivity R (dashed curve) increases
with axial strain, highlighting that, during loading, closed walks of even (respectively, odd) length contribute more (respectively,
less) to the mean subgraph centrality of the contact network. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [58].

518

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

spectator grains) to provide lateral support [19, 20, 229]. Because 3-cycles appear to be stabilizing
features, it is interesting to consider the co-evolution of force chains and 3-cycles in a contact network.
Such an investigation requires a precise deﬁnition of what constitutes a force chain, so that it is possible to
(1) extract these structures from a given packing of particles and (2) characterize and quantify force-chain
properties. Several deﬁnitions of force chains have been proposed; see, for example, [14, 16, 27, 230].
The studies that we describe in the next three paragraphs used a notion of ‘force chains’ from [14, 231],
in which force chain particles are identiﬁed based on their particle-load vectors (where each particle
is associated with a single particle-load vector that indicates the main direction of force transmission).
More speciﬁcally, a single chain is a set of three or more particles for which the magnitude of each of
their particle-load vectors is larger than the mean particle-load vector magnitude over all particles, and
for which the directions of the particle load vectors are, within some tolerance, aligned with one another
(i.e., they are ‘quasilinear’). We note that it is important in future work to conduct network-based studies
of force-chain structure for different deﬁnitions of force chains and investigate if there are differences in
their associated network properties.
Using DEM simulations of a densely packed system of polydisperse disks under biaxial loading—
i.e., compressed quasistatically at a constant strain rate in the vertical direction, while allowed to expand
under constant conﬁning pressure in the horizontal direction—Tordesillas et al. [84] quantiﬁed the coevolution of force chains and 3-cycles in several ways. For example, they computed a minimal cycle
basis (see Section 2.2.3) of a contact network and then examined (1) the ratio of 3-cycles to the total
number of cycles in which particles from a force-chain participate and (2) the force chain’s 3-cycle concentration, which they deﬁned as the ratio of 3-cycles involving force-chain particles to the total number
of particles in the force chain. When averaged over all force chains, the above two measures decrease
rapidly with increased loading. Additionally, Tordesillas et al. [84] observed that force chains that do
not fail by buckling (see [200] for how ‘buckling’ was deﬁned) have a larger ratio of 3-cycle participation to total cycle participation than force chains that do buckle. Tordesillas et al. [218] observed,
in both DEM simulations of biaxial loading (see above) and 2D photoelastic disk experiments under
pure shear, that a particular measure (developed by Bagi [228]) of structural stability of force chains
is correlated positively with the mean of the local clustering coefﬁcient [see Eq. (2.12)] over forcechain particles. They also pointed out that 3-cycles are more stable structures than cycles of longer
length during loading and that force chains with larger 3-cycle participation tend to be more structurally stable. These observations suggest that cycles—and especially 3-cycles—in contact networks
are stabilizing structures that can provide lateral support to force chains. It would be interesting to
study these ideas further, and to relate them to structural rigidity theory (see Fig. 10 and Section 3.1.2),
especially in light of the difference between 3-cycles (which are rigid) and deformable cycles (e.g.,
4-cycles).
Cycles have also been examined in granular contact networks that were extracted from DEM
simulations of 3D, ellipsoidal-particle systems subject to triaxial compression [219]. Similar to the aforementioned results from simulations of 2D systems with disk-shaped particles, the number of 3-cycles in a
minimal cycle basis of the contact networks (and the global clustering coefﬁcient [see Eq. (2.13)]) initially
decrease and then saturate with increasing load, and particles in force chains have a larger number of
3-cycles per particle than particles that are not in force chains. Tordesillas et al. [219] also observed that
the set of 3-cycles that survive throughout loading tend to lie outside the strain-localization region (where
force-chains buckle). The dearth of 3-cycles in certain regions in a material may thus be a signature of
strain-localization zones. Another article to note is [210], which examined and compared the temporal
evolution of cycles (and several other contact-network diagnostics) in a set of DEM simulations using a
variety of different material properties and boundary conditions.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

519

In another interesting study, Walker et al. [220] examined the phenomenon of aging [232, 233]—a
process in which the shear strength and stiffness of a granular material both increase with time—in
collections of photoelastic disks subject to multiple cycles of pure shear under constant volume. Because
aging is a slow process, it can be difﬁcult both to uncover meaningful temporal changes in dynamics
and to characterize important features in packing structure that accompany aging. To overcome these
challenges, Walker et al. [220] ﬁrst analysed the time series of the stress ratio (using techniques from
dynamical-systems theory) to uncover distinct temporal changes in the dynamics of the system. (See
[220] for details.) After each small, quasistatic strain step, they also extracted the contact network of the
packing at that time to relate aging to changes in topological features of the network structure. As the
shear-jammed regime is approached during prolonged cyclic shear, they observed, on average, that force
chains are associated with more 3-cycles and 4-cycles from the minimal cycle basis.
We have just discussed many articles that concern transitions in granular matter from a solid-like
regime to a liquid-like regime. One can also use changes in the loop structure of a contact network
to describe the opposite transition, in which a granular material transitions from an underconstrained,
ﬂowing state to a solid-like state during the process known as jamming (see Section 3.1.1). Studying
2D frictional simulations of isotropically compressed granular packings, Arévalo et al. [73] examined
a granular contact network as they varied packing fraction. They observed that the number of cycles
(which were called polygons in [73]) in the contact network grows suddenly when the packing fraction
approaches the critical value φc that marks the transition to a rigid state (see Fig. 12). They also observed
that 3-cycles appear to be special: they continue to grow in number above the jamming point, whereas
longer cycles slowly decrease in number after jamming. Although they observed a non-linear relationship
near the jamming point between Z (the contact number, which is the usual order parameter for the jamming
transition) and the number of 3-cycles [83], these quantities appear to depend linearly on each other after
the transition. These results suggest that one can use the evolution of contact loops to understand the
transition to a rigid state and to characterize subsequent changes in the system.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 12. The number of l-cycles in a contact network versus the packing fraction φ from a DEM simulation of isotropic compression
of a granular system. Each colour represents a cycle of a different length l: 3-cycles (black squares), 4-cycles (red circles), 5-cycles
(green triangles), 6-cycles (dark-blue inverted triangles), and 7-cycles (cyan diamonds). As the packing transitions from a ﬂuid-like
state to a solid-like one, there is an increase in the number of cycles in the contact network near the critical packing fraction φc . In
addition, while 3-cycles continue to grow in number after the transition, cycles of longer lengths slowly decrease. The inset shows
the same data on a semi-logarithmic plot. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [73].

520

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

3.1.4 Other subgraphs in contact networks. When studying contact networks, it can also be helpful to
explore network motifs other than cycles. Recall from Section 2.2.6 that motifs are subgraphs that appear
often in a network (e.g., in comparison to a null model) and are thus often construed as being related to
system function [96, 99, 242, 243]. Network motifs, which traditionally refer to small subgraphs, are a
type of mesoscale feature, and it can be insightful to examine how their prevalences change in a granular
material as it deforms.
One system in which motifs and their dynamics have been studied is frictional, bidisperse, photoelastic
disks subject to quasistatic cyclic shear [110]. After each small strain increment (i.e., strain step) in a
shear cycle, Tordesillas et al. [110] considered the contact network of the granular packing. For each
particle i in the contact network, they extracted the subgraph of particles (nodes) and contacts (edges)
formed by the central particle i and particle i’s contacting neighbours. This process results in a set of N
subgraphs9 (which, borrowing terminology from [110], we call conformation subgraphs), where N is the
number of particles in the network.

9 In some degenerate cases (e.g., when there is a network component that consists of a clique), this includes duplications of
subgraphs, even when the nodes of a network are labelled.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Application to tapped granular materials.
Properties of contact networks have also been used to study tapped granular materials, in which a
packing of grains is subject to external pulses of excitation. In most studies of tapped granular materials,
the packing and pulses are both oriented vertically. The intensity  of these mechanical perturbations
(so-called ‘taps’) is usually quantiﬁed as a dimensionless ratio of accelerations, such as the ratio of the
peak acceleration of the excitation to the acceleration of gravity [236, 237]. Tapped granular materials are
interesting because the packing fraction φ is not necessarily a monotonic function of the tapping intensity
 [238–240]. Instead, it reaches a minimum value φmin at an intensity of min , and it then increases as
the tap intensity increases (see Fig. 13a). Consequently, one can achieve steady states with the same
packing fraction by using different tap intensities (i.e., both a ‘low’ tap intensity, which is smaller than
min , and a ‘high’ tap intensity, which is larger than min ). These steady states are not equivalent to each
other, as they have different force-moment tensors [237], for example. An interesting question is thus the
following: What features of a granular packing distinguish between states at the same packing fraction
that are reached by applying different tap intensities?
Recent work has suggested that properties of contact networks—especially cycles (which, in this
case, are particle contact loops)—can distinguish between steady-state conﬁgurations at the same packing
fraction that are generated from different tap intensities. For example, in simulated 2D granular packings
subjected to tapping [235, 241] (see Fig. 13b), as  is increased in the regime  < min , the number of
3-cycles (i.e., triangles) and the number of 4-cycles (i.e., squares) both decrease. As  is increased in
the regime  > min , the opposite trend occurs, so the numbers of 3-cycles and 4-cycles increase. This
makes it possible to differentiate conﬁgurations at the same φ obtained from low and high tap intensities.
(See Fig. 13e and f for a plot of the number of triangles versus  and φ.) However, geometrical measures
like the pair-correlation function, distributions of Voronoi tessellation areas or bond orientational order
parameters do not seem to be as sensitive to differences in these two different states of the system
(see Fig. 13c and d), perhaps because they quantify only local proximity rather than directly examining
contacts. (See [235] and references therein for details of these descriptors.) These results suggest that
topological features of a contact network can capture valuable information about the organization of
granular packings.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

521

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 13. Using a contact network to distinguish states of the same packing fraction in simulations of tapped granular materials.
(a) Packing fraction φ versus tap intensity . The horizontal lines connect states at the same packing fraction that were obtained
using different tap intensities. (b) A section of one of the packings. (c) The mean value of the ‘bond orientational order parameter’
(or simply ‘bond order parameter’) as a function of tap intensity. The bond order parameter, which is often used to quantify local
and long-range crystalline structure in a material [234], was computed on each subgraph of particles deﬁned by a central particle
and the set of its neighbours within a distance of 1.2 particle diameters, and it was then averaged over all such subgraphs to obtain
a mean value. (d) The mean value of the bond order parameter for different values of packing fraction, where the arrows indicate
the direction of increasing . It is difﬁcult to differentiate between different states at the same packing fraction using this quantity.
(e, f) The same as panels (c,d), but now the vertical axis is the number of 3-cycles in the contact network. Calculating the number of
3-cycles successfully separates different states of the system with the same packing fraction. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission,
from [235].

522

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

To examine packing rearrangements as a system is sheared, Tordesillas et al. [110] represented
each distinct conformation subgraph present at any time during loading as one ‘state’ in a Markov
transition matrix, and they studied transitions between the conformation subgraphs as a discrete-time
Markov process. More speciﬁcally, each element in the nc × nc transition matrix (where nc is the total
number of unique conformation subgraphs and hence the number of unique states) captured the fraction
of times that each conformation subgraph transformed to each other conformation subgraph (including
itself) after four quasistatic steps of the shearing process. Tordesillas et al. [110] reported that forcechain particles typically occur in network regions with high mean degree, high mean local clustering
coefﬁcients, and many 3-cycles. (Note that this study, as well as the others that we describe in the present
and the following paragraph, deﬁne force-chains as in [14, 231].) Furthermore, when considering the
conformation subgraphs of particles in force chains that fail by buckling (see [227, 229] for details on
the deﬁnition of ‘buckling’), the most likely transformations tend either to maintain the topology of those
conformation subgraphs or to involve speciﬁc types of transitions. Speciﬁcally, conformation subgraphs
in which the central particle has a larger degree or is part of more 3-cycles transition to conformation
subgraphs in which the central particle has smaller degree or participates in fewer 3-cycles. Tordesillas
et al. [110] also used force information to compute a measure of structural stability (based on a structuralmechanics framework [218, 228] and summarized in a single number) for each conformation subgraph.
They then split the full range of the stability values into several smaller ‘stability intervals’ (i.e., small
ranges of contiguous structural-stability values) and modeled transitions between stability intervals as a
Markov chain. They examined the number of conformation subgraphs that occupy each stability interval
and observed pronounced peaks in some intervals that persist during loading. They also reported that
conformation subgraphs whose central particles belong to force chains tend to be more stable and that
conformation subgraphs whose central particles are part of buckling force chains have a higher probability
of transitioning from high-stability states to low-stability states than vice versa. (For details, see Fig. 7
of [110] and the corresponding discussions.)
Walker et al. [80] used similar methods to study self-assembly in an almost-frictionless 3D system of
hydrogel spheres under quasistatic, cyclic uniaxial compression (see Fig. 14a–c). After every compression step, they constructed the contact network for the system and examined two types of subgraphs for
each particle: (1) conformation subgraphs, which (as discussed earlier) consist of a single central particle
i and that particle’s contacts; and (2) the cycle-participation vector of each particle (see Section 2.2.3).
Walker et al. [80] determined the set of all unique conformation subgraphs that existed during the above
compression process. They then used each of those conformation subgraphs as one state in a transition
matrix, the elements of which give the fraction of times (across the whole experiment) that a particle
in one state transitions to any other state in consecutive compression steps. To focus on the presence or
absence of a particle in an l-cycle (using cycle lengths up to l = 10), they binarized each element of
the cycle-participation vectors. (The resulting vectors thus indicate, for each particle, whether it is part
of at least one l-cycle.) Walker et al. Walker et al. [80] then constructed a transition matrix in which
each state is a unique binarized cycle-participation vector that occurs during the experiment. The two
transition matrices capture useful information about the most likely transformations that occur between
different conformation subgraphs and cycle-participation vectors as one compresses or decompresses the
granular system. For both types of mesoscale structures, Walker et al. [80] used their transition matrices
to extract almost-invariant sets, which indicate sets of conformation subgraphs or cycle-participation
vectors (i.e., states) that tend to transition among themselves more than to states in another almostinvariant set. (See [80] for details.) In Fig. 14d, we show the most common conformation subgraphs in
each almost-invariant set of the conformation subgraphs. The conformation subgraphs formed by forcechain particles belong mostly to Set 3 (see Fig. 14d), which consists of densely-connected conformation

GRANULAR NETWORKS

523

subgraphs in which there are many contacts between particles. To characterize structural changes that
occur in a packing as it moves towards or away from a jammed conﬁguration, Walker et al. [80] tracked the
number of conformation subgraphs (and cycle-participation vectors) in each almost-invariant set across
time. Figure 14e illustrates the temporal evolution of the numbers of elements in the almost-invariant
sets of the conformation subgraphs. Walker et al. [80] also proposed transition pathways (see Fig. 14f)
that may be useful for thermo-micro-mechanical constitutive-modelling efforts [246]. (A transition pathway consists of a sequence of conformation subgraphs in different almost-invariant sets, and transitions
between them.)
Another way to study various types of subgraphs in granular materials is through the classiﬁcation
of superfamilies [98, 107] (see Section 2.2.6). A recent investigation by Walker et al. [109] considered
superfamilies that result from examining 4-particle subgraphs (see Fig. 15a) in a variety of different

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 14. Conformation subgraphs can help quantify structural transitions in a 3D network of hydrogels. (a) A rendering of a granular
system composed of spherical, hydrogel beads [244, 245] that are subject to multiple cycles of compression along a single axis.
Redder colours indicate stronger contact forces. (b) An example of a contact network in a decompressed state and (c) an example
of a contact network in a compressed state. (d) Pictorial representations of the most common conformation subgraphs in each
almost-invariant set. The almost-invariant sets are collections of conformation subgraphs that, during loading, tend to transition
amongst themselves more than they transition to conformation subgraphs in another almost-invariant set. (See the main text and
[80] for details.) (e) The evolving cardinalities of almost-invariant sets can track structural transitions during cycles of compression
and decompression. (The number of elements in an almost-invariant set at a given time step is the number of particles in the system
whose induced conformation subgraph belongs to that set.) In highly-compressed states, most conformation subgraphs in a packing
are members of Set 3, whereas most conformation subgraphs belong to Set 4 for the least-compressed states. (f) An example
of a possible transition pathway, which consists of a sequence of conformation subgraphs in a given almost-invariant set and the
transitions between them that occur during loading. In this example, the pathway corresponds to the following sequence of transitions
between sets: Set 3 → Set 2 → Set 4 → Set 2 → Set 3. The ﬁrst conformation subgraph (40) corresponds to the most prevalent
conformation subgraph in Set 3, and the conformation subgraphs for the subsequent transitions between sets are those with the
largest transition probabilities. For example, of all conformation subgraphs in Set 2, subgraph 19 is the one to which conformation
subgraph 40 (of Set 3) is most likely to transition. These transition pathways can potentially inform constitutive-modelling efforts.
We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [80].

524

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

granular systems, including experimental packings of sand and photoelastic disks, and DEM simulations for different types of loading and in different dimensions. In their study, the authors deﬁned
a superfamily as a set of networks in which the prevalence of the different 4-node subgraphs have
the same rank-ordering. (They did not consider whether the subgraph was a motif in the sense of
occurring more frequently than in a random-graph null model.) Despite the diversity of system types,
they observed several trends in the transitions between superfamilies that occur as a system transitions from a pre-failure regime to a failure regime. The most important change in the superfamilies
appears to be a switch in relative prevalence from 4-edge motifs with 3 edges arranged as a triangle to acyclic 3-edge motifs (see Fig. 15). This observation highlights the important role that small
mesoscale structures can play as building blocks in granular systems. It also suggests that examining
the prevalence and temporal evolution of such motifs can (1) help characterize the macroscopic states of
a granular system and (2) help quantify what structural changes occur as a system transitions between
different states.
Notably, although calculating the prevalence of cycles and small motifs can be useful for gaining
insights into contact-network structure, it can also be helpful to employ other types of network analysis
that examine structure on larger scales. For example, in simulations of 2D packings of disks under
isotropic compression, Arévalo et al. [73] observed that the mean shortest-path length [see Eq. (2.10)] of
a contact network reﬂects both changes in the organization of a packing as one approaches the jamming
point and changes that occur after the jamming transition takes place. The path length appears to reach
a maximum value at a packing fraction below φc . With further increases in φ below φc , the path length
then decreases rapidly, likely due to the formation of new contacts that shorten the distance between
particles as the system nears the jamming point. After the jamming transition, the path length decreases
further.
Before moving on, we note that because it can be difﬁcult to measure force information accurately
in many experimental granular systems, continuing to develop relevant measures for studying contact
topology (i.e., without incorporating weights) remains an important area of investigation.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 15. Examination of superfamilies in a granular material. (a) One can use a rank-ordering of relative frequencies of sets of
4-node subgraphs to deﬁne a superfamily in a contact network. (b) Mean degree (blue) and stress ratio (red) versus axial strain
in a DEM simulation of a deforming granular material. (The stress ratio is the minimum stress divided by the maximum stress
during a cycle of loading.) The symbols at each strain increment correspond to the superfamily of the associated contact network
at that point. During loading, the system is characterized by a superfamily transition (speciﬁcally, ABDECF −→ ADBECF) that
corresponds to a shift from one with a higher prevalence of a subgraph that includes a triangle (B) to one with a higher prevalence
of a subgraph without this stabilizing feature (D). We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [109].

GRANULAR NETWORKS

525

3.2 Force-weighted networks


Wij =

fij , if particles i and j are in contact,
0, otherwise,

(3.4)

where fij is the inter-particle force between particles i and j. Such a force network also encodes the
information in the associated contact network, and one can recover a contact network from a forceweighted network by setting all non-zero weights in the latter to 1. Although most work has determined
edge weights using the normal component of the inter-particle force, one can alternatively weight the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Although studying only a contact network can be informative (see Section 3.1), incorporating more
information into network representations allows one to more fully capture the rich behaviour of granular
materials. Many of the approaches for quantifying unweighted networks can be generalized to weighted
networks (see Section 2.2), although signiﬁcant complications often arise (e.g., because typically there
are numerous choices for precisely how to do the generalizing). From both physics and network-science
perspectives, it is sensible to construct weighted networks that incorporate information about the forces
between particles. This can shed considerable light on phenomena that have eluded understanding from
studying only unweighted contact networks.
One important physical motivation for incorporating information about inter-particle forces is that
photoelastic-disk experiments and numerical simulations have both highlighted that, particularly just
above isostaticity (see the bottom of Section 2.2.1), loads placed on granular systems are not shared
evenly across all particles. Instead, forces are carried primarily by a backbone of force chains. It has
often been claimed that the statistical distribution of the forces are approximately exponential [8], but in
fact, it depends on whether forces are recorded at a granular system’s boundary or in its bulk [247], as
well as on the loading history [17]. Illuminating how force-chain structures arise, and how their structure
varies across different regions of a material or under different conditions, provides crucial information
for understanding how one can control the elastic modulus and mechanical stability [173] and acoustic
transmission [45] in granular materials.
However, despite the ability of humans to see force chains easily in photoelastic images, it is difﬁcult to
characterize quantitatively what is or is not a force chain, and it can also be difﬁcult to quantify how force
chains evolve under compression or shear. Part of the challenge lies in the fact that force chains are spatially
anisotropic, can exhibit long-range spatial correlations [17], and can have complex temporal ﬂuctuations
[16, 38]. Consequently, understanding emergent phenomena in granular systems is typically difﬁcult using
continuum theories or approaches based only on local structure. On the other hand, a network-theoretic
perspective provides a fruitful way to explore interesting material properties and organization that arise
from inter-particle contact forces in granular materials. Importantly, in addition to data from simulations,
multiple techniques now exist for measuring inter-particle forces between grains in experiments; these
include photoelasticity [17, 248], X-ray diffraction measurements of microscopic [249] or macroscopic
[250, 251] deformations, and ﬂuorescence with light sheets [244, 245]. As we will see, incorporating
information about inter-particle forces into network-based investigations has yielded fascinating insights
into the organization and collective structure in granular packings in both numerically-simulated and
experimental systems.
The most common method for constructing a network that captures the structure of forces in a granular
system is to let a node represent a particle and then to weight the edge between two particles that are
in contact according to the value of the force between them. One can describe such a network with a
weighted adjacency matrix (see Section 2.1) W with elements

526

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

edges by inter-particle tangential forces. With the advent of high-performance computational capabilities,
one can determine inter-particle forces from DEM simulations [252] of hundreds to millions of particles.
In experiments, it is possible to determine inter-particle forces using photoelastic disks (in 2D) [248] or
X-ray tomography (in 3D) [253], although typically these techniques are limited to systems of hundreds
to thousands of particles. In Fig. 16, we show an example of a compressed collection of photoelastic
disks and illustrate the structure of a corresponding force-weighted network for the associated packing.
We now review network-based approaches for investigating force-weighted networks constructed
from granular materials and discuss the resulting insights that these approaches have provided into the
physical behaviour of such systems. We label most of the following subsubsections according to the type
of employed methodology, although we also include a subsubsection about some speciﬁc applications to
different systems.
3.2.1 Examining weighted cycles and other structural features. In Section 3.1, we discussed why
examining cycles can be useful for studying granular contact networks. It is also useful to examine cycles
when investigating force networks, which are weighted. For example, Smart and Ottino [81] studied the
evolution of weighted contact loops in a simulation of a quasistatically tilted granular packing. They used
topological information (i.e., which particles are in contact) to deﬁne the presence of a cycle, and they
deﬁned a notion of loop stability,
ξl =

l
1

f

l

edge

fi

,

(3.5)

i=1

to quantify the range of compressive loads that a given loop can support. In Eq. (3.5), l is the number of
edge
edges in the loop (i.e., its length), fi
is the contact force of the ith edge, and f is the mean edge weight
(i.e., mean force) over all of the edges in the loop. See Fig. 17 for a schematic of this stability measure
for a 3-cycle. For l = 3, the quantity ξ3 ≈ 1 corresponds to having approximately equal contact forces on
all edges and is the most stable conﬁguration (see Fig. 17a). The value of ξ3 approaches 0 as the contact

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 16. Photoelastic techniques allow the extraction of force-weighted networks from experimental granular packings. (a) An
example of the photoelastic stress pattern from a vertical, 2D collection of bidisperse disks that are compressed from the top.
(b) Corresponding structure of the force network overlaid on the image. Each particle represents a node in the network, and line
segments represent edges. Line thicknesses indicate edge weights and are proportional to the normal forces between contacting
particles. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [27].

GRANULAR NETWORKS

527

force on one edge becomes much smaller than those on the other two edges. As illustrated in Fig. 17b,
this situation is unstable. Both the density of 3-cycles (speciﬁcally, the number of 3-cycles in the system
divided by the total number of particles) and a normalized 3-cycle loop stability
ξ3∗ =

ξ3 (θg )
ξ3 (θg = 0)

(where the brackets denote means over all 3-cycles in a network) tend to decrease with increasing tilting
angle θg (see Fig. 17c). Smart and Ottino [81] also reported that the effect of tilting on loop stability is
largely independent from the effect of tilting on mean coordination number (i.e., mean degree).
Tordesillas et al. [84] examined what they called a force cycle, which is a cycle of physically-connected
particles in which each contact carries a force above the global mean. Using DEM simulations of a
biaxially compressed, dense granular system—the sample was compressed quasistatically at a constant
strain rate in the vertical direction, while allowed to expand under constant conﬁning pressure in the
horizontal direction—they studied the evolution of 3-force cycles (i.e., force cycles with 3 particles) in
a minimal cycle basis of the contact network with respect to axial strain. They observed that 3-force
cycles initially decrease in number during strain hardening, before increasing in number at the onset
of force-chain buckling [200], and then ﬁnally leveling out in number in the critical-state regime. (See
the third paragraph of Section 3.1.3 for a brief description of these different regimes of deformation.)
In Fig. 18, we show a plot of the number of 3-force cycles and the shear stress versus axial strain. The
3-force cycles that arise at the onset of buckling are often part of force chains (using the deﬁnition of force
chains from [14, 231]). Additionally, these 3-force cycles tend to concentrate in the region of the shear
band, where they can act as stabilizing structures both by frustrating relative rotations and by providing

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 17. A measure of the stability of 3-cycles quantiﬁes the effects of tilting a granular packing. The loop stability ξ3 of a 3-cycle is
determined from the contact forces along each edge of the loop. (See the main text for details.) (a) A contact loop with approximately
equal forces on all edges is very stable to perturbations in the direction of the compressive force vectors on the loop, and has a loop
stability that is close to 1. (b) A contact loop in which one of the edges has a much smaller force than the others is very unstable
to perturbations; it has a loop stability near 0. (c) The normalized mean loop stability ξ3∗ tends to decrease with increasing tilting
angle θg . We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [81].

528

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

strong lateral support to force chains. However, with increased loading, the system eventually fails, and
Tordesillas et al. [84] suggested that the increase in the number of 3-force cycles may be an indicator of
failure onset. Qualitatively similar results were observed when examining the evolution of 3-force cycles
in three DEM simulations [210], each with slightly different material properties and boundary conditions,
and in DEM simulations of 3D ellipsoidal-particle packings subject to triaxial compression [219].
Using DEM simulations for biaxial compression similar to those described in the previous paragraph,
Walker and Tordesillas [58] examined the evolution of force-weighted networks with axial strain using
several of the network concepts that we discussed in Section 2.2. Unsurprisingly, they found that including
contact forces in their network analysis yields a more complete characterization of a granular system than
ignoring them.
One measure that they felt was particularly useful is a weighted version of subgraph centrality (see
Section 2.2.5). From a contact network, Walker and Tordesillas [58] ﬁrst extracted all conformation subgraphs. As described in Section 3.1.4, a conformation subgraph is a subgraph that consists of a given
particle i and that particle’s immediate contacts. (Each particle in a network thus yields one conformation subgraph.) To incorporate inter-particle force information, Walker and Tordesillas [58] generated
force-weighted conformation subgraphs by weighting each edge in the conformation subgraphs by the
magnitude of the normal force component along that contact. They then computed a weighted subgraph
centrality Yiw for each force-weighted conformation subgraph, and they computed changes |ΔỸ w | in
magnitude between consecutive strain steps of a suitably averaged version (Ỹ w ) of this quantity (see [58]
for details). They observed that the temporal evolution of |ΔỸ w | with strain step is effective at tracking
large changes in energy dissipation rate that can occur due to rearrangement events (e.g., force-chain
buckling) associated with the loss of inter-particle contacts. They also observed that the central particle
in the conformation subgraphs that undergo the largest changes in weighted subgraph centrality seems
to be associated with locations with much dissipation, such as in the shear band and in buckling force
chains or the neighbouring particles of those force chains. (See [14, 231] for the employed deﬁnition of
force chains and [200] for the employed speciﬁcation of force-chain buckling.)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 18. Evolution of shear stress (gray curve) and the number of 3-force cycles in a minimal cycle basis of a contact network (red
curve) as a function of axial strain in a DEM simulation of a granular material under quasistatic, biaxial loading. The number of
3-force cycles decreases rapidly during the initial stages of strain hardening, but it begins to increase at the onset of force-chain
buckling (dashed line). We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [84].

GRANULAR NETWORKS

529

Walker and Tordesillas [58] highlighted that network analysis—and especially the examination of
mesoscale features—can be helpful for gaining insights into mechanisms that regulate deformation in
granular materials. Such studies can perhaps also help guide efforts in thermo-mechanical constitutive
modelling [254].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

3.2.2 Extracting multiscale architectures from a force network using community detection. A major
beneﬁt of studying a network representation of a granular system (and using associated computational
tools) is that it provides a natural framework in which to probe structure and dynamics across several spatial
scales. One can examine different spatial scales in multiple ways, including both physically (e.g., using
distance in Euclidean space or in some other metric space) or topologically (e.g., using the hop distance
along edges in a network). The ability to successfully study mesoscale architecture, which manifests
at intermediate scales between particle-level and system-wide organization, is an especially important
contribution of network analysis. One of the most common ways to examine mesoscale structures is with
community detection (see Section 2.2.7), which one can use to extract sets of densely-connected nodes
in a network [31, 32]. One can also tune community-detection methods to examine sets of nodes of a
range of sizes, from very small sets (with a lower limit of one node per set) to large sets (with an upper
limit of all nodes in a single set).
By applying multiscale community-detection methods to force-weighted contact networks of photoelastic disks and numerical simulations of frictionless packings, Bassett et al. [27] identiﬁed chain-like
structures that are visually reminiscent of force chains in granular packings (see Fig. 19a). Notably,
the algorithmic extraction of these ‘distributed’ mesoscale structures [27, 112, 113, 255], in contrast to
‘compact’, densely-connected geographical domains in a material [21], required the development of a
geographical null model, which can be used in modularity maximization and which encodes the fact
that a given particle can exert force only on other particles with which it is in direct contact [126] (see
Section 2.2.7). The different type of mesoscale organization extracted by this geographical null model
highlights the fact that using physically motivated network-based approaches, which incorporate spatial and/or physical constraints, may give different information about a granular system than what one
obtains when doing network calculations based only on network structure. In a modularity-maximization
approach to community detection, one can also tune a resolution parameter of a modularity objective
function to identify and characterize network communities of different sizes (e.g., as in Fig. 19a). One
can also use inference procedures, in concert with community detection or other forms of clustering, to
determine particularly important scales in a network.
One interesting result from [27] is that properties of force chain-like communities can distinguish
frictional, laboratory packings from frictionless, simulated ones, allowing a quantiﬁcation of structural
differences between these systems (see Fig. 19b). In later work, Huang and Daniels [255] used similar
techniques to examine friction-dependence and pressure-dependence of community structure in 3D simulations of compressed granular materials. To further quantify such mesoscale organization and examine
how it changes with compression, Giusti et al. [112] extracted communities using the geographical null
model, and used ideas from algebraic topology to deﬁne a topological compactness factor that quantiﬁes the amount of branching—versus compact, densely-interconnected regions—in communities of a
force network from 2D granular systems. The approach from [27] was extended to multilayer networks
(see Section 2.2.7) in [113], providing a way to link particulate communities across compression steps
(rather than extracting new ones at each step) when examining how such communities reconﬁgure. These
studies helped lay groundwork to improve understanding of how the multiscale nature of force-chain
architecture impacts bulk material properties. Various community-detection approaches have also been
used for identifying other types of inhomogeneities in granular matter [256].

530

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

(a)

(b)

Network Force

Simulated

Simulated

800
600
400

0.7

1.3
Resolution Parameter

1.9

200
1
Ga 0.9
pF
ac
tor

Laboratory
0.8

5

0

10

Size

Fig. 19. Community-detection techniques can uncover multiscale force-chain structures in laboratory and simulated granular packings. (a) Examples of force-chain communities extracted using modularity maximization for networks constructed from 2D
laboratory and simulated granular packings. Tuning a resolution parameter allows one to detect mesoscale features at multiple
scales in a packing: smaller resolution-parameter values yield larger and more compact communities, and larger values yield communities that are smaller and more chain-like. (b) One can characterize community structure using different measures, which are
able to differentiate between laboratory and simulated packings in a quantitative manner. In this ﬁgure, the size of a community is
the number of particles in that community, the network force of a community is the contribution of that community to modularity,
and the gap factor is a diagnostic that measures the presence of gaps and the extent of branching in a community. (The gap factor
is small for very linear or compact communities, and it is large for communities with curves and/or branching.) We adapted this
ﬁgure, with permission, from [27].

Before moving on, it is important to note that—although related—the deﬁnition of force chain structure using the community-detection approaches that we described above [21, 27, 112, 113, 255] differs
from the deﬁnitions of force chains that have been used in some other studies (e.g., see [14]). In future
work, it is important to examine how the properties of force chains differ when they are deﬁned in
different ways.
3.2.3 Some applications.
Comminution processes. A network-based approach can give fascinating insights into comminution, the
fragmentation of a material into smaller pieces. Walker et al. [257] used DEM simulations to study
comminution in a granular material under uniaxial compression and reported that the degree distribution
of the system’s contact network (which we recall is unweighted) evolves towards a power law during
this process. This observation is consistent with the development of a power-law grain-size distribution,
in which large particles are hubs that have many smaller, neighbouring particles, which make up the
majority of a packing. Walker et al. [257] also examined several other features (such as measures of
network efﬁciency, node betweenness, and cycle populations) of both contact networks and networks
weighted by the normal force between particles for progressively larger strains to examine what changes
occur in a granular system during comminution.
Heat transfer. Another problem that has been examined using network-based methods is heat transfer in
granular matter. Using a heat-transport model on simulations of a compressed granular material, Smart
et al. [24] probed the effects of heterogeneity in the force distribution and the spatial arrangements
of forces in a system on heat transfer through the material. Speciﬁcally, they compared measures of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Laboratory

1000

GRANULAR NETWORKS

531

Acoustic transmission. One can also examine the effect of network structure on properties such as electrical conductivity in systems composed of metallic particles or on other types of transport (such as
sound propagation) through a particulate material. The transmission of acoustic signals through granular materials is poorly understood [23], and it is particularly challenging to explain using continuum
or particulate models [42–44]. Bassett et al. [21] represented compressed, 2D packings of bidisperse,
photoelastic disks as force-weighted contact networks, and found that some network diagnostics are able
to identify injection versus scattering phases of acoustic signals transmitted through a granular material.
Among the diagnostics that they computed, the authors observed that network efﬁciency (see Eq. (2.11)
in Section 2.2.2) is correlated positively with acoustic transmission during the signal-injection phase,
suggesting that high-amplitude and high-energy signals are transmitted preferentially along short paths
(and perhaps even shortest paths) through a force-weighted contact network. In contrast, low-amplitude
and low-energy signals that reverberate through a packing during the subsequent signal-scattering phase
correlate positively with the intra-community strength z-score, which characterizes how strongly a node
connects to other nodes in its own community. These results suggest that one can use network diagnostics
that probe diverse spatial scales in a system to describe different bulk properties. Because [21] did not use
community-detection approaches informed by a geographical null model (see Section 2.2.7), it did not
address (and it is not yet fully understood) how acoustic transmission depends on the multiscale architecture of chain-like structures reminiscent of force chains. This remains an open issue, and network-based
approaches—for example, using geographical null models and other ideas that pay attention to the role
of space—are likely to be important in future work on this topic.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

transport in the (normal) force-weighted network of a granular system to two null-model networks with
the same contact topology but with either (1) homogenous, uniform edge weights that were equal to the
mean force of the packing; or (2) the same set of heterogeneous edge weights from the actual granular
network, but assigned uniformly at random to the edges. Smart et al. [24] estimated the thermal diffusivity
and effective conductivity from simulations on each network, and they observed that the real granular
system has signiﬁcantly higher diffusivity and effective conductivity than the homogenous null model.
Additionally, comparing the results from the real material to the null model with randomly reassigned
edge weights demonstrated that the qualitative differences between the real granular network and the
homogenous null model could not be explained by the heterogeneity in the force distribution alone, as
the authors observed that this second null model (with randomly reassigned edge weights) was also not
a good medium for heat transfer.
To investigate what features of a granular network facilitate efﬁcient heat transfer, Smart et al. [24]
deﬁned a weighted network distance (see Section 2.2.2) between particles i and j as dijw = 1/Hij , where
Hij is the local heat-transfer coefﬁcient, such that the network distance between two particles in contact is
proportional to that contact’s resistance to heat transfer. Note that Hij ∝ fijν , where fij is the magnitude of the
normal force between i and j, and ν ≥ 0 is a constant. They then deﬁned a network-based (but physicallymotivated) measure of heat transport efﬁciency as the weighted efﬁciency E w (see Section 2.2.2) computed
using the distances dijw . In a comparison between the real granular system and the two null models, E w
gave the same quantitative results as the effective conductivity. In particular, the calculations in [24]
revealed that the real granular system has a larger efﬁciency than that of either null model, suggesting
that the spatial distribution of force-chain structure in the granular network appears to facilitate heat
transport. Finally, iterative edge removals in decreasing order of geodesic edge betweenness centrality
[Eq. (2.17)] yield a faster decrease in effective conductivity than either uniformly-random edge removals
or edge removals in decreasing order of the local heat-transport coefﬁcient, further illustrating the utility
of network-theoretic measures for examining transport phenomena in granular systems.

532

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

3.2.4 Thresholded force networks. Before researchers started using network-based methods as a common perspective for studying granular materials, Radjai et al. [19, 258] reported that under stress,
the force network in simulations of granular matter organizes into two subsets: one set with ‘strong’
contacts and another set with ‘weak’ contacts. The strong subnetwork of forces forms a backbone
of chain-like structures that carry most of a system’s load and tend to align approximately with the
direction of compression. Between these strong force chains, there is a weak subnetwork of contacts
that carry forces that are less than the mean. This weak subnetwork tends to have an anisotropy that
is orthogonal to the compression, and it may provide support to the backbone of strong forces. Such
heterogeneity in a force network is an interesting feature of granular materials, and network-based
approaches provide a direct way to examine how strong and weak contacts impact material properties
and stability.
These ideas have been explored using force-thresholded networks [73, 82, 83, 259], in which one
retains only contacts that carry a force of at least some threshold fth . That is,

Ath
ij

=

1, if particles i and j are in contact and fij ≥ fth ,
0, otherwise.

(3.6)

The threshold fth should be lower-bounded by the smallest non-zero contact force fmin in the system
being considered. (Note that when fth = fmin , one includes all contacts in the force-thresholded network.)
It is common to use a system’s mean force  f  as a reference point and to systematically vary fth to be
different fractions of the mean force. Whether one uses the normal or the tangential component of the
force, varying fth results in a series of thresholded networks that one can subsequently characterize using
traditional network or percolation-based analyses (which we discuss in the following three paragraphs
of this subsubsection) or using methods from computational algebraic topology (which we discuss in
Section 3.2.5). See Fig. 20 for an example depicting the contacts and forces at two different values of
the force threshold in a simulation of a 2D granular material. There is also a connection between the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 20. The contacts and forces in a granular network at two different force thresholds. (a) When only contacts with forces
f > 1.3 f  (where  f  is the mean force) are included, the resulting network is composed of many disconnected components. (b)
As one decreases the threshold, the components grow, and if only contacts with f >  f  are included, the network is connected and
‘percolates’ along the axis of compression. The system is a numerical simulation of a dense, 2D collection of hard spheres under
biaxial compression. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [19].

GRANULAR NETWORKS

533

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

idea of force-thresholded networks and carrying out modularity maximization with the geographical
null model [Eq. (2.23)] and a resolution parameter γ (see Section 2.2.7). Similar to how increasing the
threshold fth selects the subset of particles in a network for which inter-particle forces exceed or equal
the threshold, in modularity maximization, increasing the resolution-parameter value γ tends to yield
communities of particles such that within a community, the inter-particle forces are at least as large as the
threshold γ  f .
Arévalo et al. [73, 82, 83] examined several network diagnostics—for example, mean degree, shortestpath length, diameter, LCC size, and component-size distributions—with respect to the force threshold
fth (and at different values of the packing fraction) in DEM simulations of 2D granular packings under
isotropic compression. The computations in [73, 82] suggest that the way in which many of these measures
change as one varies fth depends on packing fraction, and many of the measures can thus potentially be
used to help understand differences in the organization of force networks above versus below the jamming
point. For example, for packing fractions above the jamming point, the LCC size and the shortest-path
length undergo qualitative changes in behaviour near a threshold fth ≈  f , signifying interesting structural
changes in the organization of the force networks at that threshold. The relationship between the number
of 3-particle contact cycles (i.e., triangles) and the force threshold was also examined in Arévalo et al.
[73, 83]. In the jammed state, they observed a steep decline in the number of 3-cycles in the networks as
they increased the threshold and considered only progressively larger forces. This observation suggests
that triangles (or at least one of their contacts) belong primarily to the weak subnetwork of forces that
help support strong, ﬁlamentary force-chain structures. See Fig. 1 and Sections 3.1.3 and 3.2.1 for other
discussions of the roles of cycles and their relationship to force chains. As we discuss in Section 3.2.5,
one can also use methods from computational algebraic topology to examine the evolution of cycle
organization in dense granular materials.
Another way to study force-thresholded granular networks is to use a percolation-like approach
(see Section 2.2.9). For example, one can examine the sizes and number of connected components in a
thresholded network with respect to fth [176, 180–182, 260]. For dense packings, the intuition is that when
fth is very large, a force-thresholded granular network splits up into several disconnected components;
and as one decreases fth , these components begin to merge until eventually all contacts are in a single
component. In this type of bond percolation, which edges are included in the network thus depends
on the force that the edges carry. One can look for a critical threshold fthc such that for fth > fthc , the
network fragments into many small components, but as one lowers the threshold towards fthc , a large,
percolating cluster forms in the system (see Section 2.2.9). Quantities that are often investigated when
studying this type of force-percolation transition include fthc and ‘critical exponents’ for the transition (see
Section 2.2.9). Because both experimental and computational granular systems are ﬁnite in practice, such
investigations often use ﬁnite-size scaling techniques.
Several simulation-based studies of granular systems have deployed percolation analyses based on
force-thresholded networks to quantify the organization of granular force networks, how such organization
changes with increasing compression, and other phenomena [180–182, 260]. For example, Pastor-Satorras
and Miguel [181] studied force percolation in the q-model [10] of anisotropic granular force networks, in
which there is a preferred direction of force propagation. They concluded that the asymmetry in the model
has a signiﬁcant effect on the percolation transition, and they found that the critical exponents differ from
those of isotropically compressed granular force networks. Kovalcinova et al. [180] investigated force
percolation in a variety of simulations of slowly compressed, 2D granular systems. They examined the
effects of polydispersity and friction, ﬁnding that these factors can qualitatively inﬂuence various features
of the percolation transition. Very recently, Pathak et al. [182] also investigated the force-percolation
transition in simulations of jammed granular packings at ﬁxed pressures.

534

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

3.2.5 Methods from computational algebraic topology. In addition to traditional approaches for network
analysis, one can also study the architecture of granular networks using ideas from algebraic topology.
Persistent homology (PH) [153, 165, 183, 190] (see Section 2.2.10) seems especially appropriate, and
over the past several years, it has provided a fruitful perspective on the structure of compressed [163–
166, 261] and tapped [167–169] granular materials. Very recently, methods from computational algebraic
topology have also been used to study responses of granular materials to impact [262, 263]. One way to
characterize the organization and evolution of granular force networks is to examine how Betti numbers
(see Section 2.2.10) change with respect to a force threshold (and also with respect to packing fraction) in
compressed granular systems. This includes studying the birth and death of components (determined by
β0 ) and loops (determined by β1 ) as one varies a force threshold by computing and analysing persistence
diagrams (PDs). See Fig. 8 of Section 2.2.10. Examining when and how long different features persist in
a network provides a detailed characterization of the structure of granular force networks, and one can
quantify differences between two networks by deﬁning measures of ‘distance’ between their associated
PDs. These capabilities allow a PH framework to provide a distinct set of contributions that complement
more traditional network-based analyses of components, cycle structure, and other features.
Kondic et al. [163] investigated how simulated 2D granular force networks evolve under slow compression as they cross the jamming point. They ﬁrst demonstrated that one can identify the jamming
transition by a signiﬁcant change in behaviour of β0 (speciﬁcally, there is an increase in the number of
components at a force threshold approximately equal to the mean force  f ), and that structural properties of the network—such as the size of the connected components—continue to change above jamming.
Kondic et al. [163] also demonstrated that β0 and β1 can quantitatively describe the effects of friction and
polydispersity on the organization of force networks (and can distinguish how friction and polydispersity
alter the structure of a force network). This work was extended in Kramár et al. [164], who studied numerical simulations of 2D, slowly compressed, dense granular materials using PH. In addition to examining
the values of the Betti numbers, they also computed β0 and β1 PDs (PD0 and PD1 , respectively) as the system was compressed to quantify the appearance, disappearance, and lifetimes of components and loops.
In [164], Kramár et al. deﬁned a ﬁltration over the clique complex of the networks (see Section 2.2.10),
so only loops with four or more particles were counted. To extract useful information from the PDs, they
binned the persistence points in each diagram into different regions, corresponding to features that (1)
are born at any force threshold but have relatively short lifetimes compared to those that persist for a
large range of thresholds and that are born at either (2) strong, (3) medium, or (4) weak forces. Their
persistence analysis led to several insights about the structure of a normal-force network as a granular
system is compressed, as well as insights into differences in the structure of a normal-force network for
systems with different amounts of friction and different polydispersities. For example, Kramár et al. [164]
observed that, near the jamming point, frictionless packings appear to have more ‘extreme’ features than
frictional packings, in the sense that frictionless packings have many more β0 persistence points that are
born at either weak or strong forces and that are relatively long-lived. Kramár et al. also pointed out that
the effects of polydispersity and friction may be difﬁcult to observe using traditional measures such as
the probability density function of the normal forces.
Kramár et al. [166] also used PH to study force networks from simulations of slowly compressed,
polydisperse packings of disks in 2D as they traverse the jamming transition (see Fig. 21a). As they
compressed the system through a range of packing fractions ρ, they extracted force information at
approximately ﬁxed time intervals during the simulation, and they then computed PDs of components
and loops (i.e., PD0 and PD1 , respectively) for each force network sampled during compression (see
Fig. 21b). As in other studies, [166] used the clique complex of the force networks to avoid counting 3particle loops. They then used the bottleneck distance dB and two variants, dW 1 and dW 2 , of the Wasserstein

GRANULAR NETWORKS

535

distance [190] to quantify differences between two PDs and thereby help quantify differences in local and
global features between two granular force networks. As described in Kramár et al. [166], the bottleneck
distance captures only the largest difference between two PDs, whereas the Wasserstein distances include
all differences between two PDs, with dW 1 more sensitive than dW 2 to small changes. (See [166] for more

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 21. Examination of granular force networks using computational algebraic topology. (a) An example of a force network from a
simulation of a dense, 2D, frictional, polydisperse granular material under compression. The grayscale bar indicates the magnitude
of the normal force (normalized by the mean force in the packing) between contacting particles. (b) The left panel shows PD0 for
the force network, and the right panel shows PD1 for the force network. These PDs indicate the appearance and disappearance of
connected components and loops, respectively. Because the ﬁltration is deﬁned over the clique complex of the force network, one
counts loops only when they include four or more particles. (c) One can examine the evolution of the force network as one varies
packing fraction ρ by using various distances (left axis) to quantify differences between the PDs computed from force information
from consecutive samples (see the main text for details) of the system during compression. These distances (the bottleneck distance
dB and two variants, dW 1 and dW 2 , of the Wasserstein distance [190]) capture both local and global changes in force geometry as
one compresses the system. The curve for the mean coordination number Z (right axis) gives the mean number of contacts per
particle, and the steep rise in Z signiﬁes the onset of jamming. The values of the distances (which we show for consecutive PD0 s)
change dramatically as the system goes through the jamming point, after which they vary much more smoothly. See [166] for
details about these measures and for an example computation of the distances between consecutive PD1 s with respect to packing
fraction. (d) The ratios of some of the distance measures during compression. Considered in conjunction with the behaviour of the
distance measures in panel (c), the dramatic drop in these ratios near the jamming point signiﬁes a rapid global restructuring of
the force network that occurs via many small changes in the organization of the network’s connected components. We adapted this
ﬁgure, with permission, from [166].

536

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

details.) Calculating the various types of distance between the two β0 PDs and the two β1 PDs for
consecutive samples (i.e., consecutive states) of a force network allows one to characterize different
kinds of variations in the geometry of force networks as a function of packing fraction (see Fig. 21c).
Using the aforementioned distance measures, Kramár et al. [166] observed that in the unjammed state,
there can be signiﬁcant (but localized) reorganization in force geometry as a packing is compressed. They
also concluded that the jamming transition is characterized by rapid and dramatic global rearrangements
of a force network, followed by smoother and less dramatic reconﬁguration in the system above jamming,
where the distances between consecutive states of a packing are much smaller than in the unjammed state.
Kramár et al. [166] also found that tangential-force networks seem to exhibit similar behaviour (in most
respects) to that of normal-force networks. They also observed that friction can have a signiﬁcant impact
on how the geometry of the forces reconﬁgures with compression. For example, they showed that the
rate of change of loop features (as measured by the distances between consecutive PD1 s) is larger for
a frictional system than for a frictionless one below the jamming point, but just before jamming and
thereafter (i.e., during the entire jammed state) differences in loop structure between consecutive packing
fractions are larger for frictionless systems than for frictional ones.
In very recent work, Kondic et al. [261] used PH to examine the temporal scales on which granular
force networks evolve during slow compression. They simulated dense 2D granular materials and studied
the inﬂuence of the externally-imposed time scale—set by the rate of compression—on how frequently
one should sample a system during compression to be able to evaluate its dynamics near the jamming
transition. By varying the sampling rate and carrying out a persistence analysis to quantify the distance
between consecutive sampled states of the system, their results indicate that close to jamming, a force
network evolves on a time scale that is much faster than the one imposed by the external compression.
See [261] for further details.
One can also use PH to study force networks in tapped granular systems. Pugnaloni et al. [169]
examined DEM simulations of two different 2D systems exposed to tapping. One type of packing consisted
of monosized disk-shaped particles, and the other type consisted of monosized pentagon-shaped particles.
Pugnaloni et al. [169]’s investigation suggested that particle shape can play an important role in mechanical
responses, which is consistent with observations from classical investigations of granular materials [18].
More speciﬁcally, Pugnaloni et al. [169] computed β0 and β1 with respect to force threshold in both
normal-force networks and tangential-force networks. They observed for both types of force-weighted
networks (but particularly for the tangential one) that the ﬁrst two Betti numbers are able to clearly
distinguish between disks and pentagons, where β0 (respectively, β1 ) is consistently larger (respectively,
smaller) for pentagons across a wide range of force thresholds. However, using only β0 and β1 , Pugnaloni
et al. [169] were unable to clearly differentiate states with similar packing fractions but that result from
different tap intensities.
In a follow-up investigation, Kondic et al. [168] simulated a series of several taps to granular packings
and used PH to examine how normal and tangential force-weighted networks vary between individual tap
realizations. Speciﬁcally, they computed distances between PD0 s and between PD1 s of force networks
associated either with individual realizations of tapping to the same system or with individual realizations
of tapping to two different systems. In one part of their study, they examined systems of disks exposed to
a series of taps at two different tap intensities. (See Section 3.1.3 for a rough delineation of ‘low’ tapping
intensity versus ‘high’ tapping intensity.) They observed that in terms of loop structure, the set of networks
generated from a series of taps at low intensity differ far more substantially from each other—as quantiﬁed
by the distribution of distances between the PD1 s for different realizations of the tapping—than do the set
of force networks from a series of taps at high intensity. They also observed that the distances between
different realizations of low-intensity tapping are as large as the distances between low-intensity tapping

GRANULAR NETWORKS

537

3.3 Other network representations and approaches
3.3.1 Network-ﬂow models of force transmission. Another technique for gaining insight into the organization of forces in deforming granular systems, and how microscale aspects of a force network
lead to macroscale phenomena such as shear bands and material failure, is to view force transmission
from the perspective of maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cut and maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cost problems (see
Section 2.2.8). To examine a granular system using such a perspective, one can consider the ‘ﬂow’ of
force through a contact network (with some contacts able to transmit more force than others), which in
turn yields a ‘cost’ to the system in terms of energy dissipation at the transmitting contacts [264–268].
One can calculate ﬂow and costs in routes through a network (and hence determine bottlenecks in force
transmission) to gain understanding of how contact structure relates to and constrains a system’s ability
to transmit forces in a material. For example, Lin and Tordesillas [267, 268] constructed ﬂow networks
from DEM simulations of a system of polydisperse particles compressed quasistatically under a constant

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

and high-intensity tapping realizations. Therefore, although the high-intensity tapping and low-intensity
tapping regimes yield networks with approximately the same packing fraction (see Section 3.1.3), one
can use methods from PH to help explain some of the differences between the packing structure in the
two regimes. In another part of their study, Kondic et al. [168] carried out a persistence analysis of tapped
packings of disks and tapped packings of pentagons, and they observed clear distinctions between the
two systems based on calculations of β1 PDs. For example, for each system, they computed the PD1 s
for a set of networks associated with several individual realizations of the same tapping intensity, and
they then computed a distance between each pair of PD1 s for realizations within the same packing and
across the two types of packings. They observed that the distribution of distances between the PD1 s of
individual tapping realizations to the packing of pentagons is narrower and centred at a smaller value than
the distribution of distances between individual realizations of taps for the packing of disks. They also
observed that the distances between the disk and pentagon systems are much larger than those between
different realizations of the disk system. Thus, Kondic et al. [168] were able to distinguish clearly between
tapped disk packings and tapped pentagon packings using PH, especially when considering properties of
loop structures. Past work using 2D experiments has also been able to distinguish between the dynamics
of disk and pentagon packings using conventional approaches [18].
One can also use methods from computational algebraic topology to study granular networks in which
one uses edge weights from something other than a force. For example, Ardanza-Trevijano et al. [167]
used only particle positions (in the form of point clouds) and computed Betti numbers to distinguish
states at the same density but that are at different mechanical equilibria. Using both experimental and
simulated 2D granular packings of monodisperse particles, they constructed networks by locating the
centre of each particle and then introducing a ﬁltration parameter δ, such that any two particles separated
by a Euclidean distance less than or equal to δ are adjacent to each other in a graph. They considered
δ ∈ [d, 1.12d], where d is the particle diameter and the domain for δ resembles the choices that are used
for determining if particles are in physical contact with each other. The authors computed, as a function
of δ, the ﬁrst Betti number β1 on the whole network to count the total number of loops at a given δ. They
also computed β1 on the ﬂag complex (see Section 2.2.10), thus counting the number of loops with four
or more nodes at a given value of δ. For values of δ that are slightly larger than d, Ardanza-Trevijano et al.
[167] were able to separate states at the same packing fraction that are generated by tapping at different
intensities. They observed for a ﬁxed packing fraction that states that arise from lower-intensity tapping
have a larger value of β1 when computed on the whole network and a lower value of β1 when computed
on the ﬂag complex. Their results were robust to both noise and errors in particle-position data.

538

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

3.3.2 Broken-link networks. In previous discussions (see Sections 3.1 and 3.2), we have seen that one
way to investigate the evolution of a granular system under an applied load is (1) to compute contact
networks or force-weighted networks for the system with respect to packing fraction, strain, or some other
control parameter and then (2) to study how different features and properties of the networks emerge and
change as one varies that parameter. One can also use other network constructions to explore different
mesoscale features and examine system dynamics. For example, Herrera et al. [28] designed a brokenlink network (see Fig. 22) to study the dynamics of 3D granular ﬂows. They conducted an experiment
on a collection of acrylic beads immersed in a box of liquid medium, shearing the system at a constant

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

strain rate in the vertical direction and allowed to expand under constant conﬁning pressure in the horizontal direction. At a given axial-strain value (i.e., ‘strain state’), they assigned uniform capacities uij
to each edge of the contact network to reﬂect the maximum ﬂow that can be transmitted through each
contact, and they assigned costs cij to each edge to model dissipation of energy at each contact. After
each axial-strain increment during loading, they then solved the maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cost problem
for the network at the given strain state, ﬁnding that edges in the minimum cut (yielding bottlenecks in
the force-transmission networks) localize in the material’s shear band. By using costs cij that reﬂected
the type of inter-particle contact (speciﬁcally, elastic contacts versus various types of plastic contacts)
Lin and Tordesillas [267, 268] were able to track different stages of deformation (i.e., strain-hardening,
strain-softening, and the critical-state regime). They also computed a minimal cycle basis and observed
that a large majority of force-chain particles and particles in 3-cycles are involved in the set of contacts
that comprise the maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cost routes.
One can use the above approach with various deﬁnitions of force capacity and cost functions. Using
simulations of the same type of system as that in the previous paragraph, Tordesillas et al. [266] constructed
networks—one for each strain state as a system was loaded until it failed—that incorporated information
about both the inter-particle contacts at a given strain state and the particle displacements that occur
between consecutive strain steps. Speciﬁcally, if nodes i and j are in contact at a given strain state, the
weight of the edge between them is the inverse of the absolute value of the magnitude of the relative
displacement vector of particles i and j, where one computes the displacement for each particle from the
previous strain state to the current one. The distance between nodes i and j is 0 if the associated particles
are not in contact. The intuition behind this capacity function is that, when there is more relative motion
between a pair of particles, one expects those particles to have less capacity to transmit force to each
other. Tordesillas et al. [265] used capacities that incorporate 3-cycle memberships of edges in a study of
minimum cuts of a ﬂow network in two samples of 3D sand under triaxial compression and in a 3D DEM
simulation of simple shear. They observed that grains in the bottlenecks localize early during loading
and are indicative of subsequent shear-band formation. Other work [264] studied DEM simulations of
compressed, 3D bonded granular materials (where bonded signiﬁes that the grains are connected via solid
bonds of some strength) and a system of 2D photoelastic disks under shear stress with the goal of testing
the hypothesis that an appropriate maximum-ﬂow–minimum-cost approach can identify experimentallydetermined load-bearing particles and force-chain particles without relying on knowledge of contact
forces. Tordesillas et al. [264] examined different combinations of force-transmission capacity and cost
functions, and they examined the fraction of force-chain particles that are part of the associated maximumﬂow–minimum-cost network for a given capacity and cost function. In both cases, costs based on 3-cycle
membership of edges seem to yield large values of these fractions, and Tordesillas et al. [264] were able
to successfully forecast most of the particles that eventually become part of force chains without using
information about contact forces.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

539

rate ( ≈ 1.05 × 10−3 rad/s) by a rotating circular disk at the bottom of the box. (See [28] for details
about their experiments.) First, they constructed proximity networks (a variant of a contact network) as
a function of time. (Speciﬁcally, they constructed one network every 3-degree increment of rotation.)
In their proximity network, they assigned a ‘contact’ (edge) to each pair of particles whose distance
from one another in the given frame was within a speciﬁed distance threshold, which they chose to be a
conservative upper bound for particle contact. They then deﬁned a broken link (relative to some reference
frame) as an existing edge between two particles in the reference frame that was subsequently absent in
at least two later time frames (due to the particles having moved apart). A broken-link network for the
frame in which a pair of particles moved apart had an edge between the two particles that were initially
in contact, and broken links were not allowed to reform later. In Fig. 22a, we illustrate this procedure for
constructing a broken-link network.
Studying the temporal evolution of a broken-link network provides a quantitative approach for examining particle rearrangement events in granular matter. To examine the temporal evolution of a granular
system, Herrera et al. [28] examined the size of the LCC in a sequence of broken-link networks as they
varied applied shear, drawing an analogy between the fraction χb of broken links and the occupation
probability in traditional percolation problems (see Section 2.2.9). They observed that the fraction sg
of nodes in the LCC of the broken-link network grows with χb in a way that suggests that there is a
continuous phase transition in sg , and they approximated the value of χb at which this transition occurs.
(However, as we noted in Section 2.2.9, because these networks have ﬁnite sizes, one needs to be cautious regarding statements about percolation and phase transitions.) From a physical standpoint, this
transition region, corresponds to a characteristic deformation at which broken links—which are due to
particle rearrangements—start to become globally connected, relative to a reference proximity network.
By examining χb as they applied shear to the system, Herrera et al. [28] approximated a characteristic
amount of strain associated with this transition region (by mapping the value of χb associated with the
transition region to a corresponding value of strain), and they suggested that the determined strain scale
may be useful for identifying the onset of global reorganization in the system.
In a later study, Slotterback et al. [162] used a similar approach to examine progression from reversible
to irreversible dynamics in granular suspensions under oscillatory shear strain. In experiments similar to
the one described above [28], the authors considered a series of 20 shear cycles of the following form: for
each cycle in one experiment, a suspension was sheared with a rotating disk up to a strain amplitude of
θr , after which the direction of rotation was reversed and the disk was rotated by −θr back to its original
location. The authors performed experiments for θr values of 2◦ , 4◦ , 10◦ , 20◦ , and 40◦ . In a qualitative

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 22. A broken-link network can yield insights into dynamic reconﬁguration in granular shear ﬂows. (a) A schematic of the
construction of a broken-link network based on changes in a proximity network that occur as a system is sheared. (b) An example
of a broken-link network (with edges in green) at one instant in time. We adapted this ﬁgure, with permission, from [28].

540

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

3.3.3 Constructing networks from time series of node properties or from kinematic data. Another
way to examine the organization of deforming granular materials is to construct networks based on the
temporal evolution of particle properties [114, 116, 256, 269], an idea that draws from earlier work in
complex systems on constructing networks from different kinds of time-series data. (See, for example,
[107, 270–274].) In one type of construction, which yields what are sometimes called functional networks
[192], one records the time series of some property of each particle and places an edge (which can
potentially be weighted and/or directed) between two particles according to some relationship (e.g.,
some type of distance or other measure of similarity) between the particle-property time series. When
using a different property, the nodes are the same, but the edges and especially edge weights will in
general be different. Once networks have been constructed, one can examine them using techniques such
as those in Section 2.2. Some authors have also used the generic term particle-property networks to
describe networks that they constructed in some way from particle properties.
Walker and Tordesillas [114] used particle-property networks to study the evolution of DEM simulations of a quasistatically deforming, 2D granular material under biaxial compression. They constructed
time series for two features (as well as their coevolution) for each particle—membership in force chains
(determined as in [14, 231]) and membership in 3-cycles of a minimal cycle basis—by recording a 1 if
a particle has the given property and a 0 if it does not. They then quantiﬁed the similarity of particleproperty evolution using the Hamming distance [275], and they added (undirected and unweighted) edges
between each particle and its k closest (i.e., most similar) particles until eventually obtaining a single
network with one connected component. Walker and Tordesillas [114] then extracted sets of particles that
exhibit similar dynamic behaviour by detecting communities (see Section 2.2.7) in the particle-property
networks. This approach uncovered distinct regions in the material—including the shear band and different subnetworks composed of primarily force chain or primarily non-force-chain particles—as well
as interlaced regions in the shear band that alternate between jammed and unjammed conﬁgurations. See
[116, 269] for additional studies that used membership in cycles of length up to l = 7 for the construction
of particle-property networks.
One can also construct particle-property networks from data that do not rely on knowledge of contact
or force networks. For example, Walker et al. [117] studied deformation in sand subject to plane-strain

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

sense, measuring ‘reversibility’ of the dynamics in this setup entails determining the extent to which
particles return to their original positions after some number of shear cycles. To quantify this idea, one
can compute the mean square displacement (MSD) of the particles after each cycle, where smaller MSD
values correspond to more reversible dynamics. To study this system, Slotterback et al. [162] adjusted
the idea of a broken-link network to include ‘healing’, so that broken links that are repaired in later
frames do not contribute edges in the broken-link network, and they studied the temporal evolution of
this broken-link network as they varied the cyclic shear and for different amplitudes θr . In addition to the
extent of spatial (ir)reversibility measured by calculating the MSD, Slotterback et al. [162] also proposed
a notion of topological (ir)reversibility by examining the temporal evolution of the size of the LCC in
their broken-link networks. For low values of θr (speciﬁcally, for θr ≤ 20◦ ), the system appears to be
almost reversible: proximity-based contacts break, but they reform after shear reversal, and the fraction
of particles in the LCC of the broken-link network thus grows before subsequently shrinking to almost
0 after reversal. However, for a higher shearing amplitude (speciﬁcally, for θr = 40◦ ), the system shows
signatures of irreversibility. Many broken links do not reform after a shear cycle, and after reversal, the
LCC of the broken-link network remains at a value that constitutes a substantial fraction of the total
system size.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

541

3.4 Comparing and contrasting different network representations and approaches
Network representations of granular and other particulate systems, in combination with methods from
network science and related disciplines, provide a plethora of ways to analyse these systems. However,
for these tools to be optimally useful in furthering understanding of the physics of these systems, it is
also important to draw connections between the many existing approaches. The application of networkbased frameworks to the study of granular matter is relatively young, and little work thus far has focused
speciﬁcally on exploring such connections, but it is crucial to determine (1) how conclusions from different
approaches relate to one another and (2) how similarities and differences in these conclusions depend on
the system being studied. In this short subsection, we point out a few relationships and places to begin
thinking about such questions.
First, it is important to consider the network representation itself. We have discussed several different
representations in this review, and some are more related to each other than others. Broadly speaking, one
class of granular networks tries to encode the physical structure of a material—in the sense that edges exist
only when there is an inter-particle contact—at a given point in an experiment or simulation. Such networks
include contact networks (see Section 3.1) and force-weighted networks (see Section 3.2). One can obtain
a contact network from an associated force-weighted network by discarding the edge weights and keeping

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

compression using measurements of grain-scale displacements from digital image correlations
[276, 277]. From these data, they constructed kinematic networks, a type of network that arises from
some measurement of motion (such as displacement or a rotation) over a small time increment. Walker
et al. [117] considered each observation grid point of digital images of a sample to be a node, and they
placed edges between nodes with similar displacement vectors during a small axial-strain increment. This
yields a collection of (undirected and unweighted) time-ordered kinematic networks. In another study,
Tordesillas et al. [115] calculated particle rotations and displacements for triaxial compression tests on
sand using x-ray micro-tomography scanning [278]. They generated an ordered set of networks from
these data for several strain steps by treating each grain as a node and linking nodes with similar kinematics during the speciﬁed interval. More speciﬁcally, they represented the displacements and rotations
of each particle as points in a state space, and they connected particles that are nearby in that state space
according to Euclidean distance. In the network that they constructed, each particle is adjacent to k nearest
neighbours in state space, where k is as small as possible so that the (unweighted and undirected) network
is using connected. Various notions of what it means to be ‘similar’, and thus how to quantitatively deﬁne
edges, are discussed in [116, 117]. To probe the collective dynamics of interacting groups of particles for
the network in each strain step, Tordesillas et al. [115] detected communities corresponding to mesoscale
regions in the material that exhibit similar dynamic behaviour. Calculating the mean shortest-path length
between pairs of particles in the same community yields a potentially important intermediate spatial scale
(that they concluded is consistent with the shear-band diameter) of a granular system. For each strain
step, they computed a variant of closeness centrality—it is similar to the one in Section 2.2.5, but it is not
exactly the same—of each particle in the corresponding network, and observed that particles with large
closeness centrality localize in the region of the shear band early in loading (and, in particular, before the
shear band develops). This study highlights the potential of network analysis to provide early warning to
detect regions of failure in particulate systems.
Methods from non-linear time-series analysis have also been used in network-based studies of stickslip dynamics in a granular packing sheared by a slider [108]. Using so-called phase-space networks
(see [107] for a description of them) to construct networks from measurements of a slider time series,
Walker et al. [108] associated network communities with slip events.

542

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

3.5 Limitations and practicalities of simulations and experiments
Network-based studies of granular materials have examined inter-particle contact and force data (and
associated dynamics, such as in the presence of external loading) from both experiments and simulations.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

information only about connectivity. Force-weighted networks thus contain much more information, and
they allow one to investigate phenomena—such as force-chain organization—that may not be possible
to probe with the contact network alone. However, it is still important to develop tools for the analysis of
contact networks and understand what phenomena arises from features of the connectivity alone (or what
one can learn and explain from connectivity alone), as force information may not always be available or
may not be necessary to understand certain behaviours of a granular system. Generalizing some quantities
(e.g., betweenness centralities) from unweighted networks to weighted networks also involves choices,
and it is often desirable to conduct investigations that have as few of these potentially confounding factors
as possible. Other types of granular networks do not encode physical connectivity, but instead directly
represent something about the dynamics or changes that occur in a system during an experiment or simulation. Examples of such networks include broken-link networks (see Section 3.3.2) and particle-property
networks (see Section 3.3.3). These different classes of network representations offer distinct ways of
studying granular materials, and utilizing each of them should improve understanding of these systems.
For a given network representation, it is reasonable to expect that conclusions that arise from similar
network quantities or methods of analysis are related to one another, whereas conclusions that result
from tools designed to probe very different kinds of organization in a network provide rather different
information about the underlying granular system [21, 112]. For example, some studies have suggested
that in deforming granular materials, results based on calculations of clustering coefﬁcients are similar
to those from studying 3-cycles. This is intuitively reasonable, given that calculating a local clustering
coefﬁcient yields one type of local 3-cycle density. We have also observed that conclusions drawn from
examinations of small subgraphs in a deforming granular system may also be related to whether or
not those subgraphs contain cycles of certain lengths. As we discussed in Section 2.3, another way to
draw connections between different approaches is to consider the spatial, topological, or other scales
that are probed by the different approaches. For instance, in a force-weighted network, node strength
is a particle-scale property, and it encompasses only very local information about a granular material.
However, granular systems exhibit collective organization and dynamics on several larger scales that may
be difﬁcult to understand by exclusively computing local measures and distributions of such measures. To
obtain an understanding of larger-scale structures, it is necessary to also employ different methods, such
as community detection, PH, or the examination of conformation subgraphs that are composed of more
than just a single particle. Utilizing such approaches has provided insights into force-chain structure,
shear band formation, and reconﬁguration in granular systems under load that one may not be able to
obtain by considering only local network quantities. It is thus important to continue to use and develop
methods to analyse granular networks across multiple scales, as doing so can provide important and
new information about a system. Finally, we note that even a single approach, depending on how it is
used, can provide multiple types of information about a granular network. A good illustration of this is
community detection. In Section 2.2.7, for example, we saw that using different null models in modularity
maximization allows one to probe different types of mesoscale architecture in granular force networks.
We look forward to forthcoming studies that directly compare the results and assumptions in different
approaches (both network-based and traditional ones) and different network representations of granular
and other particulate systems. Conducting principled investigations into how conclusions from various
network-based approaches are related is indeed an important direction for future work.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

543

4. Open problems and future directions
We now discuss a few open problems and research directions for which we anticipate important progress
in the near future. We divide our comments into three main areas: the construction of different types of
networks that encode various physical relationships or other properties (see Section 4.1), the application
of network analysis to additional types of materials (see Section 4.2), and the application of network-based
approaches to the design of materials (see Section 4.3). Network tools can provide valuable insights—
both explanatory and predictive—into particulate materials and their dynamics, and a lot of fascinating
research is on the horizon.
4.1 Network representations and computations
To brieﬂy explore the potential of different approaches for constructing granular (and other particulate) networks for providing insights into the physics of granular materials (and particulate

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

A recent summary of the many experimental techniques available for obtaining data about inter-particle
contacts is available in the focus issue [279]. Such techniques include laser-sheet scanning [245], photoelasticity [248], x-ray tomography [253], and nuclear magnetic resonance [280]. Using each of the
ﬁrst three approaches, it is possible to measure both particle positions and inter-particle forces. If one
is careful, it is sometimes possible to measure the forces as vectors (i.e., including both the normal and
tangential components), but some techniques or systems do not have sufﬁcient resolution to allow more
than scalar or coarse-grained values. Determining the forces also helps experimentalists to conﬁdently
construct contact (i.e., unweighted) networks of particulate materials. In deciding whether or not two
particles are actually in contact, rather than merely being adjacent in space, it is necessary to perform a
detailed study of the effects of thresholding the data [201]. Any experimental technique will imperfectly
report the presence versus absence of the weakest contacts in a system. Additionally, because of the difﬁculty of accessing the interior of granular materials, much more data is available for 2D force networks
than for 3D force networks [279].
The most widely-used simulation techniques are DEMs [252], in which the dynamics of individual
particles (usually spheres) are determined by their pairwise interactions under Newton’s laws of motion.
The normal forces are typically determined from a Hertzian-like contact law (see, e.g., the sidebar in
[281] for an introduction to Hertzian contacts) via an energy penalty for the overlap of two particles. The
tangential (frictional) forces are most commonly modelled using the Cundall–Strack method [282] of a
spring and a dashpot, but they have also been modelled via the surface roughness created by a connected set
of smaller spheres [283]. For a given application, it is not known whether these simpliﬁed models capture
all of the salient features of inter-grain contacts, and the situation likely differs for different applications.
For example, experimental measurements of sound propagation in photoelastic disks [23] suggest that
the amplitude of sounds waves may be largest along a force-chain network, an effect not observed in
DEM simulations [284]. This is likely a consequence of real particles physically deforming their shape
to create an increased contact area through which sound can be transmitted; existing DEM simulations
do not account for this effect. Another important use of particle simulations is to provide a means to
investigate the robustness of network-based analyses to various amounts of experimental error [165].
Simulations provide an important check on experimental uncertainties in the determination of forceweighted networks and other network representations of granular materials. Conversely, network-based
approaches provide a means to compare how faithfully simulations are able to reproduce experimental
results.

544

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

4.1.1 Deﬁnitions of nodes and edges. There are many choices—both explicit and implicit—for constructing a network [29, 287], and these choices can impact the physics that one can probe in granular
networks [21]. Perhaps the most obvious choices lie in how one deﬁnes nodes and edges.
In the study of granular materials, a common deﬁnition is to treat individual particles as nodes and to
treat contacts as edges (often with weights from the inter-particle forces). A natural set of open questions
lies in how contact network architectures depend on different features of the grains in a system. For
example, there have been several recent studies on systems composed of particles that are neither spheres
nor disks—including ones with U-shaped particles [288], Z-shaped particles [289], squares and rods
[290, 291], dimers and ellipses [292], and others [293, 294]. It would be interesting to build network
representations of these systems, examine how different grain geometries affect network organization,
and investigate how that organization relates to the mechanical properties of a system [295]. It seems
particularly important to develop an understanding of which (quantitative and qualitative) aspects of
network structure depend on features of grains (such as shape, polydispersity, friction, cohesiveness, and
so on [27, 164, 168, 169, 176, 180, 210]) and which are more universal.
One can also consider deﬁning particulate networks in a variety of other ways. For example, when
determining edges and edge weights, one can examine the tangential (rather than, or in addition to, the
usual normal) component of the force between two grains. Such extensions may facilitate increasingly
detailed investigations into a packing’s organization [166]. It may also be useful to retain information about both the magnitude and direction of forces when deﬁning edges. One may even wish to
construct signed networks, for which edges can take either positive or negative values, thereby conveying further information about the relationship between nodes. In such studies, one can perhaps take
advantage of advancements in community-detection techniques, such as by using signed null models
[296, 297]. Additionally, as we discussed in Section 3.3, particle-property networks [114, 116, 269]
and networks constructed from particle-displacement information [28, 115, 117, 162] are other informative ways to build networks for particulate systems. One can also construct edges (and determine edge
weights) by incorporating information about inter-grain relationships based on similarities in particle
properties such as orientation [298] (see Fig. 23), coefﬁcient of friction [299], or size [300]. Constructing networks whose edges are determined or weighted by inter-particle similarities may be particularly
useful for achieving a better understanding of mesoscale physics in polydisperse packings, which are
thought to depend on the spatial distributions of particles of different types [301]. A perhaps nonintuitive choice is to use a bipartite representation of a granular network, such as the approach used
in [302].
The above choices for network construction give a grain-centric view of the physics of particulate
materials. One can also consider edge-to-node ‘duals’ of such networks to provide a contact-centric
perspective. In a contact-centric approach, one treats contacts between physical objects as nodes and
the objects themselves as edges between contacts. (Compare this idea to the notion of a line graph

10 Other ideas that are worth considering include memory networks [285], adaptive networks [49], and various representations
of temporal networks [286].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

matter more generally), we discuss choices of nodes, choices of edges, edge-to-node dual networks,
multilayer networks, and annotated networks.10 It is also worth thinking about what calculations to
do once one has constructed a network representation of a particulate system, so we also brieﬂy
consider the important issue of developing physically-informed methods and diagnostics for network
analysis.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

545

[303] of a network G.) A contact-centric network approach was used recently in the study of nanorod
dispersions [304, 305]. Contacts between rods were treated as nodes, and the effective conductance of
the rod was treated as a weighted edge. The treatment of a grain or other physical object as an edge rather
than as a node is also a particularly appealing way to describe networks of ﬁbres in both human-made
and natural systems. Recent examples of such ﬁbre networks that have beneﬁted from network analysis
include collagen networks [298, 306] (see Fig. 23), ﬁbrin networks [307], and axonal-ﬁbre networks
[57, 308].
Another way to study granular systems (especially porous ones) is to consider a network constructed
from the pore space [309], in which pores (i.e., empty volumes between contacting grains) are nodes
and throats (i.e., ﬂow pathways that connect pores) are edges (which can be weighted in various ways).
Conveniently, there are several methods to precisely determine pores and grains [310]. Studying pore
networks is a common way to examine ﬂow through porous materials or to understand the responses of
granular materials to external stresses, but only more recently have such networks been studied explicitly
from a network-science perspective. See [311–315] for some recent examples, and see [316] for a study
of force chains in porous media.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

Fig. 23. Constructing a network representation of collagen-ﬁbre alignment. We show quantitative polarized light images (QPLIs)
of the human cervical facet capsular ligament taken both before and during loading. These data were collected as part of a study
of collagen-ﬁbre realignment following a mechanical stretching of the material. Such realignment is a mechanical process that
commonly leads to both acute and chronic neck pain, particularly following car accidents. QPLIs were used to generate pixel-wise
collagen alignment maps in the selected regions of interest (ROI) of anomalous realignment (AR; red box) and normal realignment
(NR; blue box) at rest (time point t = 1), at the onset of AR (time point t = T ), and in between these two points in 1-second
increments. Rectangular ROIs were deﬁned using the upper-left and lower-right ﬁduciary markers as the common information
between different time points. Each 3 × 3 pixel window in an ROI is a node in a network. We show representative 3 × 3 pixel
windows in the resting and stretched states, along with a corresponding demonstration of alignments. For each node, we calculate
the alignment angle, and we use a measure of similarity between alignment angles to weight the edges in the network. In this way,
weighted adjacency matrices, with nodes numbered spatially, illustrate a pairwise similarity in alignment angles between ROIs.
We reproduced this ﬁgure, with permission, from [298].

546

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

4.1.3 Annotated graphs. The network-construction techniques that we have been discussing throughout
this review represent data in the form of an adjacency matrix (for an ordinary graph) or an adjacency tensor
(for a multilayer network) [36, 136, 137]. However, it may be desirable to encode not only relationships
between grains, but also features of the grains and/or their interactions. One option is to use annotated graphs (one can also use multilayer networks) to encode inter-node relationships, individual-node
properties, and individual-edge properties [317, 318]. One can use annotated graphs—also sometimes
called labelled graphs or tagged graphs [319]—to study properties of interaction patterns (such as forceweighted contacts) that may be driven by local particle properties (e.g., size, shape, spatial position
in a material, membership in cycles or force chains, and so on). Available tools for annotated graphs
include clustering techniques in the form of SBMs that combine information from both connectivity and
annotations to infer densely-connected sets of nodes [317, 318].
4.1.4 Beyond pairwise interactions. It is also desirable to explicitly examine interactions between
three or more particles, rather than restricting one’s study to representations of pairwise interactions. We
discussed this idea brieﬂy in Section 2.2.10 in the context of simplicial complexes [320], and we note
that one can also encode edges among three or more nodes by using hypergraphs [29].
4.1.5 Physically-informed network calculations. In addition to exploring different choices of how to
construct particulate networks, it is also important to consider ways to generalize the tools of network
science to incorporate physical constraints [27, 37]. A natural way to begin is to build null models of
spatially-embedded graphs that obey simple mechanical constraints like force balance [321]. One can
also develop network diagnostics and methods that incorporate physical geometry, spatial embedding,
and latent spatial structure of networks [37]. For such investigations, we expect that ideas from the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

4.1.2 Multilayer networks. When considering different ways to construct a network, it is also natural
to ask whether it is beneﬁcial to combine two or more approaches in an integrated way to more accurately
(and elaborately) represent a particulate system as a network. Ideally, doing network analysis using a more
complicated representation will also lead to improved physical understanding. One way to incorporate
heterogeneous node types, multiple types of relationships between nodes, and time-dependence into
network representations is with multilayer networks [36, 135, 137]. Recall that [113] (see Section 2.2.7)
studied one type of multilayer community structure in a compressed granular material. Another type of
multilayer network that may be useful for the study of particulate systems is a multiplex network, in
which one can encode different types of relationships between nodes in different layers of a network.
For example, one can construct a multiplex network in which two particles are linked both by normal
force-weighted contacts and according to another relationship (such as the tangential force between
them, their contact angle, or by a measure of similarity of one or several particle-properties, as discussed
in Section 3.3.3). One can also envision using multilayer networks to study particulate systems with
multiple types of particles. For example, if a system consists of particles of different shapes or sizes,
one possibility is that each particle of a given shape (or size) is in a different layer, intralayer edges
represent interactions between particles of the same type, and interlayer edges represent interactions
between particles of different types. Another possibility is to let each layer represent a time window,
perhaps with intralayer edges representing a mean interaction strength during that window. The study
of multilayer networks is one of the most popular areas of network science, and we expect that such
networks will be very illuminating for studies of particulate matter.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

547

4.2 Beyond granular materials
Although we have focused primarily on network analysis of the canonical type of granular systems,
which consist of discrete, macroscopic particles that interact via contact forces, one can potentially also
use network-based approaches to characterize granular materials with more complex interactions as
well as soft materials more broadly [327]. As reviewed recently in [6], these materials include colloids,
glasses, polymers, and gels. In these systems (and others) the particles (or other entities) can interact via
various (and often complicated) means.11 For example, system components can have attractive and/or
repulsive long-range interactions [329], can be cohesive [330], and/or can interact with one another via
chemical gradients [331, 332], electric charges [333–335], or through other molecular or mechanical
processes [336]. In each of these cases, interaction strengths can yield edge weights, either as the sole
relationship studied between entities in a graph or as one of several inter-entity relationships in a multilayer
network.
One particularly interesting avenue for future work may be to study polymer and ﬁbre networks
[337, 338], which are important in biological systems. For example, in biopolymer assemblies, crosslinking can glue ﬁlaments together into large-scale web-like structures (e.g., as in the cytoskeleton of a
cell) [339]. Such cross-linked actin ﬁlaments are critical for cellular function and integrity [340], and it
is thus important to understand the structural organization of these kinds of networks, their mechanical
properties, and how force transmission is regulated in them [341–343]. Indeed, there has already been
some work examining network representations of gels and polymers, and employing graph-theoretic
analyses to quantify the structural properties of these systems (see, e.g., [344–349]). One can also use
network analysis to study systems at smaller spatial scales. Because traditional network-based approaches
are agnostic to the physical scale of a system, off-the-shelf calculations and algorithms are directly
portable to microscale, nanoscale, and even smaller-scale systems [327, 350]. However, despite the
technical portability of common tools, the investigation of much smaller-scale systems should beneﬁt from the extension of classical network-based tools in ways that incorporate additional underlying
physics. For example, we have described extensions of network tools to assimilate ideas and constraints
from classical physics (e.g., spatial embeddedness) [27, 129]. One can also consider employing ideas
that take into account principles from quantum physics [353, 354] or other areas. The study of quantum networks is a new and exciting area of network science, and there are many opportunities for
progress [355].

11

One can also examine particulate networks of hard materials that admit Hamiltonian descriptions [328].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

study of random geometric graphs, random neighbourhood graphs, and their extensions will be helpful [21, 351, 352]. It will also be useful to employ kinetic approaches, such as the one in [322], and
to incorporate ideas of ﬂow and other forms of dynamics into community detection [122, 323]. Additionally, it is desirable to develop methods to more explicitly characterize the relationship between a
network’s structure and the geometry of a space in which it is embedded [37, 324, 325] (as well as
latent geometry) and to use such techniques to better understand the plurality of packings that are consistent with a single force distribution via a force-network ensemble, which is the space of allowed
force conﬁgurations for a ﬁxed contact geometry [202–205, 326]. We also point out that a spatial
embedding can induce correlations between network diagnostics [21], and it is therefore important to
develop a better understanding of the extent to which this occurs in networks that arise from particulate
systems.

548

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

4.3 Implications for material design

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

As is the case with mathematics more generally, network analysis gives a ﬂexible approach for studying
many systems, because it is agnostic to many details of their physical (or other) nature [29, 86, 356].
Such versatility supports the application of network-science techniques to both living and non-living
materials to examine the architectures and dynamics of these systems and to gain insights into relationships between structure and function. The tools and approaches of network science also have
the potential to inform the design of new materials. For example, it should be possible to use network theory (e.g., via the tuning of a system’s network architecture) to provide guidance for how
to engineer a material to exhibit speciﬁc mechanical, electrical, or other properties. Material design
has become increasingly popular with recent advances in the study and development of metamaterials [357–359]. Metamaterials can take advantage of precisely-deﬁned component shapes, geometries,
orientations, arrangements, and connectivity patterns (rather than speciﬁc material and physical characteristics of individual units) to produce tailored mechanical [360], acoustic [281, 359, 361–363],
and electromagnetic [357, 364, 365] properties. The control of a single unit or component is relatively straightforward, but the question of how to link many components in ways that yield complex
material properties is a very challenging one. Approaches that use ideas from network science have
the potential to offer guidance for construction patterns of material units that support desired bulk
properties.
There are likely many ways to use network-based approaches to inform the design of new materials.
One reasonable possibility is to employ evolutionary and genetic computer algorithms [366, 367] and other
tools from algorithmic game theory [368]. For example, the combination of multi-objective functions and
Pareto optimality [369] can offer a targeted path through the space of possible network architectures (i.e.,
through a network morphospace [370]). If exact simulations are not computationally tractable, one can
use machine-learning techniques to offer fast estimates of material properties and behaviour [371]. One
can perhaps begin with a single material network structure that is physically realizable and then rewire
the initial network architecture with a cost function that drives the system towards an arrangement that
enhances a desired property. One can perform such a rewiring explicitly along Pareto-optimal fronts using
a set of rewiring rules that preserve physical constraints and laws. This approach, which builds on prior
applications to other types of spatially-embedded networks [372–374], selects for physically-feasible
network designs that purposely maximize speciﬁc properties. A network analysis of these ‘evolved’ (and
evolving) networks may help elucidate relationships between structural features of system architecture
(e.g., values of a speciﬁc network diagnostic) and material properties (e.g., stability under load), providing
a link between structure and function. Such an evolutionary-design approach can complement recent
efforts to identify optimal shapes with which to construct a packing [375, 376], to design rules with
which to pack those shapes [377, 378], and to construct ‘allosteric materials’ with speciﬁc functionalities
via evolution according to ﬁtness functions [379].
One set of problems for which network-based tools may be useful are those related to rigidity and
mechanical responses of disordered material networks, which have been studied previously using a
rigidity-percolation framework [170, 172, 177, 380]. In terms of material design, a particularly interesting
line of future work may be to use network analysis in conjunction with methods such as tuning-by-pruning,
in which individual bonds are selectively removed from a disordered material network to engineer a speciﬁc property into a system [381]. For example, beginning with simulated, disordered spring networks
(derived from jammed particle packings), Goodrich et al. [381] used tuning-by-pruning to design networks with different ratios of the shear modulus to the bulk modulus. Motivated by allosteric responses
in proteins, [382] developed an approach that allows careful control of local mechanical responses in

GRANULAR NETWORKS

549

5. Conclusions
Network science is an interdisciplinary subject—drawing on methods from physics, mathematics, statistics, computer science, social science, and many other disciplines—that has been used successfully to
help understand the structure and function of many complex systems. Much recent work on networks has
yielded fascinating insights into granular materials, which consist of collections of discrete, macroscopic
particles whose contact interactions give rise to many interesting behaviours and intricate organization
on multiple spatial and temporal scales. These insights have increased scientiﬁc understanding of the
structure and dynamics of the heterogeneous material architecture that manifests in granular matter (as
well as network-based approaches to quantify such architecture) and the response of granular systems to
external perturbations such as compression, shear, tapping, and tilting. In this article, we have reviewed
the increasingly fertile intersection of network science and granular materials. Future efforts should help
provide a better understanding of the physics of particulate matter more generally, elucidate the roles
of mesoscale interaction patterns in mechanical failure, inform the design of new materials with desired
properties, and further scientiﬁc understanding of numerous important problems and applications in
granular physics, soft-matter physics more generally, and even biophysics.

Acknowledgements
We thank Alejandro J. Martı́nez, Ann E. Sizemore, Konstantin Mischaikow, Jen Schwarz and an anonymous referee for helpful comments. We also thank our collaborators, students and mentors, who have
shaped our views on the subjects of this review.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

disordered elastic networks. In particular, with the removal of very few bonds, one can tune the local strain
in one region of a network via a response to an applied strain in a distant region of a system. Driscoll et al.
[383] studied three different spring networks and continuously tuned their mechanical rigidity (measured
by different parameters, such as the distance above isostaticity) to examine the effect of such tuning on
material failure. They observed that for a ﬁxed amount of disorder (which the authors measured using a
scalar, following the approach in [384]), the width of the failure zone in a stressed material increases as
the rigidity decreases. Recently, [385] studied a model of amorphous networks that incorporates anglebending forces, and employed pruning-based methods to design auxetic metamaterials. In light of these
ﬁndings, it is natural to ask what network quantities and methods may be related to the above types of
global or local mechanical properties, and whether they can inform which bonds to remove (or rearrange
[224]) to invoke particular types of functional responses.
In developing a network-based approach for designing and building new materials, it is desirable
to capitalize on the ability of network analysis to quantify multiscale structures (with respect to space,
time, and network architectures) in a wide variety of systems (regardless of the exact details of their
composition). For example, network analysis has revealed mesoscale architectures that are often crucial for
determining material properties in disordered media, but such heterogeneities also appear to be important
for biological materials, including networks of collagen ﬁbres [298, 386], tissues and tendons [387, 388],
muscle ﬁbres [389], and axonal ﬁbres [56, 390]. Tools from network science should be useful (and, in
principle, ﬂexible) for designing non-trivial structural organizations that yield desired material functions.
One can imagine using a network-theoretic framework to design localized, mesoscale, and/or systemlevel properties, to design and manipulate human-made and natural (including biological) materials, and
to precisely control both static and dynamic material properties.

550

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Funding

References
1. Jaeger, H. M., Nagel, S. R. & Behringer, R. P. (1996) Granular solids, liquids, and gases. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
68, 1259–1273.
2. Duran, J. (1999) Sands, Powders, and Grains: An Introduction to the Physics of Granular Materials. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
3. Mehta, A. (2007) Granular Physics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
4. Franklin, S. V. & Shattuck, M. D. (eds). (2015) Handbook of Granular Materials. Boca Raton, FL, USA:
CRC Press.
5. Andreotti, B., Forterre, Y. & Pouliquen, O. (2013) Granular Media: Between Solid and Fluid. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
6. Nagel, S. R. (2017) Experimental soft-matter science. Rev. Mod. Phys., 89, 025002.
7. Mort, P., Michaels, J. N., Behringer, R. P., Campbell, C. S., Kondic, L., Kheiripour Langroudi, M.,
Shattuck, M., Tang, J., Tardos, G. I. & Wassgren, C. (2015) Dense granular ﬂow—a collaborative study.
Powder Technol., 284, 571–584.
8. Liu, C.-H., Nagel, S. R., Schecter, D. A., Coppersmith, S. N., Majumdar, S., Narayan, O. & Witten, T. A.
(1995) Force ﬂuctuations in bead packs. Science, 269, 513–515.
9. Mueth, D. M., Jaeger, H. M. & Nagel, S. R. (1998) Force distribution in a granular medium. Phys. Rev. E,
57, 3164–3169.
10. Coppersmith, S. N., Liu, C.-H., Majumdar, S., Narayan, O. & Witten, T. A. (1996) Model for force
ﬂuctuations in bead packs. Phys. Rev. E, 53, 4673–4685.
11. Claudin, P., Bouchaud, J.-P., Cates, M. E. & Wittmer, J. P. (1998) Models of stress ﬂuctuations in granular
media. Phys. Rev. E, 57, 4441–4457.
12. Sexton, M. G., Socolar, J. E. S. & Schaeffer, D. G. (1999) Force distribution in a scalar model for
noncohesive granular material. Phys Rev E, 60, 1999–2008.
13. Socolar, J. E. S., Schaeffer, D. G. & Claudin, P. (2002) Directed force chain networks and stress response
in static granular materials. Eur. Phys. J. E, 7, 353–370.
14. Peters, J. F., Muthuswamy, M., Wibowo, J. & Tordesillas, A. (2005) Characterization of force chains in
granular material. Phys. Rev. E, 72, 041307, 2005.
15. Behringer, R. P., Bi, D., Chakraborty, B., Clark, A., Dijksman, J., Ren, J. & Zhang, J. (2014) Statistical
properties of granular materials near jamming. J. Stat. Mech. Theor. Exper., 2014, P06004.
16. Howell, D., Behringer, R. P. & Veje, C. (1999) Stress ﬂuctuations in a 2D granular Couette experiment: a
continuous transition. Phys. Rev. Lett., 82, 5241–5244.
17. Majmudar, T. S. & Behringer, R. P. (2005) Contact force measurements and stress-induced anisotropy in
granular materials. Nature, 435, 1079–1082.
18. Geng, J., Howell, D., Longhi, E., Behringer, R. P., Reydellet, G., Vanel, L., Clément, E. & Luding,
S. (2001) Footprints in sand: the response of a granular material to local perturbations. Phys. Rev. Lett., 87,
035506.
19. Radjai, F., Wolf, D. E., Jean, M. & Moreau, J.-J. (1998) Bimodal character of stress transmission in granular
packings. Phys. Rev. Lett., 80, 61–64.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

KED is grateful for support from the National Science Foundation (DMR-0644743, DMR-1206808) and
the James S. McDonnell Foundation. LP is grateful to the National Science Foundation for a Graduate
Research Fellowship. DSB is grateful to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation; the John D. and Catherine
T. MacArthur Foundation; the Paul G. Allen Foundation; and the National Science Foundation (PHY1554488). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
ofﬁcial views of any of the funding agencies.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

551

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

20. Cates, M. E., Wittmer, J. P., Bouchaud, J.-P. & Claudin, P. (1999) Jamming and static stress transmission
in granular materials. Chaos, 9, 511–522.
21. Bassett, D. S., Owens, E. T., Daniels, K. E. & Porter, M. A. (2012) Inﬂuence of network topology on sound
propagation in granular materials. Phys. Rev. E, 86, 041306.
22. Richard, P., Nicodemi, M., Delannay, R., Ribière, P. & Bideau, D. (2005) Slow relaxation and compaction
of granular systems. Nat. Mater., 4, 121–128.
23. Owens, E. T. & Daniels, K. E. (2011) Sound propagation and force chains in granular materials. Europhys.
Lett., 94, 54005.
24. Smart, A., Umbanhowar, P. & Ottino, J. (2007) Effects of self-organization on transport in granular matter:
a network-based approach. Europhys. Lett., 79, 24002.
25. Gervois, A., Ammi, M., Travers, T., Bideau, D., Messager, J.-C. & Troadec, J.-P. (1989) Importance of
disorder in the conductivity of packings under compression. Phys. Stat. Mech. Appl., 157, 565–569.
26. Combe, G., Richefeu, V., Stasiak, M. & Atman, A. P. F. (2015) Experimental validation of a nonextensive
scaling law in conﬁned granular media. Phys. Rev. Lett., 115, 238301.
27. Bassett, D. S., Owens, E. T., Porter, M.A., Manning, M. L. & Daniels, K. E. (2015) Extraction of force-chain
network architecture in granular materials using community detection. Soft Matter, 11, 2731–2744.
28. Herrera, M., McCarthy, S., Slotterback, S., Cephas, E., Losert, W. & Girvan, M. (2011) Path to fracture
in granular ﬂows: dynamics of contact networks. Phys. Rev. E, 83, 061303.
29. Newman, M. E. J. (2010) Networks: An Introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
30. Bollobás, B. (1998) Modern Graph Theory. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
31. Fortunato, S. & Hric, D. (2016) Community detection in networks: a user guide. Phys. Rep., 659, 1–44.
32. Porter, M. A., Onnela, J.-P. & Mucha, P. J. (2009) Communities in networks. Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 56,
1082–1097, 1164–1166.
33. Fortunato, S. (2010) Community detection in graphs. Phys. Rep., 486, 75–174.
34. Csermely, P., London, A., Wu, L.-Y. & Uzzi, B. (2013) Structure and dynamics of core–periphery networks.
J. Complex Netw., 1, 93–123.
35. Newman, M. E. J. (2011) Complex systems: a survey. Amer. J. Phys., 79, 800–810.
36. Kivelä, M., Arenas, A., Barthelemy, M., Gleeson, J. P., Moreno, Y. & Porter, M. A. (2014) Multilayer
networks. J. Complex Netw., 2, 203–271.
37. Barthélemy, M. (2011) Spatial networks. Phys. Rep., 499, 1–101.
38. Cruz Hidalgo, R., Grosse, C. U., Kun, F., Reinhardt, H. W. & Herrmann, H. J. (2002) Evolution of
percolating force chains in compressed granular media. Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 205501.
39. Candelier, R., Dauchot, O. & Biroli, G. (2009) Building blocks of dynamical heterogeneities in dense
granular media. Phys. Rev. Lett., 102, 088001.
40. Mehta, A., Barker, G. C. & Luck, J. M. (2008) Heterogeneities in granular dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 105, 8244–8249.
41. Keys, A. S., Abate, A. R., Glotzer, S. C. & Durian, D. J. (2007) Measurement of growing dynamical length
scales and prediction of the jamming transition in a granular material. Nat. Phys., 3, 260–264.
42. Digby, P. J. (1981) The effective elastic moduli of porous granular rocks. J. Appl. Mech., 48, 803–808.
43. Velický, B. & Caroli, C. (2002) Pressure dependence of the sound velocity in a two-dimensional lattice of
Hertz–Mindlin balls: mean-ﬁeld description. Phys. Rev. E, 65, 021307.
44. Goddard, J. D. (1990) Nonlinear elasticity and pressure-dependent wave speeds in granular media. Proc. R.
Soc. A, 430, 105–131.
45. Makse, H. A., Gland, N., Johnson, D. L. & Schwartz, L. M. (1999) Why effective medium theory fails in
granular materials. Phys. Rev. Lett., 83, 5070–5073.
46. Goldenberg, C. & Goldhirsch, I. (2005) Friction enhances elasticity in granular solids. Nature, 435,
188–191.
47. Smart, A. & Ottino, J. M. (2008) Granular matter and networks: three related examples. Soft Matter, 4,
2125–2131.
48. Holme, P. & Saramäki, J. (2012) Temporal networks. Phys. Rep., 519, 97–125.

552

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

49. Sayama, H., Pestov, I., Schmidt, J., Bush, B. J., Wong, C.,Yamanoi, J. & Gross, T. (2013) Modeling complex
systems with adaptive networks. Comput. Math. Appl., 65, 1645–1664.
50. Newman, M. E. J., Barabási, A.-L. & Watts, D. J. (2006) The Structure and Dynamics of Networks. Princeton,
NJ, USA: Princeton University Press.
51. Giusti, C., Ghrist, R. & Bassett, D. S. (2016) Two’s company, three (or more) is a simplex: algebraictopological tools for understanding higher-order structure in neural data. J. Comput. Neurosci., 41, 1–14.
52. Porter, M. A. & Gleeson, J. P. (2016) Dynamical Systems on Networks: A Tutorial. Frontiers in Applied
Dynamical Systems: Reviews and Tutorials, vol. 4. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
53. Liben-Nowell, D. & Kleinberg, J. (2008) Tracing information ﬂow on a global scale using internet chain-letter
data. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 4633–4638.
54. Scott, J. (2012) Social Network Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA, USA: SAGE Publications.
55. Hurd, T. R., Gleeson, J. P. & Melnik, S. (2017) A framework for analyzing contagion in assortative banking
networks. PLoS One, 12, e0170579.
56. Sporns, O. (2013) Structure and function of complex brain networks. Dialog. Clin. Neurosci., 15, 247–262.
57. Bassett, D. S. & Sporns, O. (2017) Network neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci., 20, 353–364.
58. Walker, D. M. & Tordesillas, A. (2010) Topological evolution in dense granular materials: a complex
networks perspective. Int. J. Solids Struct., 47, 624–639.
59. Barrat, A., Barthélemy, M., Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. (2004) The architecture of complex
weighted networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA , 101, 3747–3752.
60. Newman, M. E. J. (2004) Analysis of weighted networks. Phys. Rev. E, 70, 056131.
61. Alexander, S. (1998) Amorphous solids: their structure, lattice dynamics and elasticity. Phys. Rep., 296,
65–236.
62. Wyart, M. (2005) On the rigidity of amorphous solids. Ann. Phys., 30, 1.
63. Liu, A. J. & Nagel, S. R. (2010) The jamming transition and the marginally jammed solid. Annu. Rev. Condens.
Matter Phys., 1, 347–369.
64. van Hecke, M. (2010) Jamming of soft particles: geometry, mechanics, scaling and isostaticity. J. Phys.
Condens. Matter, 22, 033101.
65. Masuda, N., Porter, M. A. & Lambiotte, R. (2017) Random walks and diffusion on networks. Phys. Rep.,
716–717: 1–58.
66. Krioukov, D., Papadopoulos, F., Kitsak, M., Vahdat, A. & Boguñá, M. (2010) Hyperbolic geometry of
complex networks. Phys. Rev. E, 82, 036106.
67. Skiena, S. (2008) The Algorithm Design Manual. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
68. Watts, D. J. & Strogatz, S. H. (1998) Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393,
440–442.
69. Latora, V. & Marchiori, M. (2001) Efﬁcient behavior of small-world networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 198701.
70. Rubinov, M. & Sporns, O. (2009) Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and interpretations.
Neuroimage, 52, 1059–1069.
71. Latora, V. & Marchiori, M. (2003) Economic small-world behavior in weighted networks. Eur. Phys. J. B,
32, 249–263.
72. Estrada, E. & Hatano, N. (2016) Communicability angle and the spatial efﬁciency of networks. SIAM Rev.,
58, 692–715.
73. Arévalo, R., Zuriguel, I. & Maza, D. (2010) Topology of the force network in the jamming transition of an
isotropically compressed granular packing. Phys. Rev. E, 81, 041302.
74. Gross, J. L. & Yellen, J. (2005) Graph Theory and Its Applications. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press.
75. Kavitha, T., Liebchen, C., Mehlhorn, K., Michail, D., Rizzi, R., Ueckerdt, T. & Zweig, K. A. (2009) Cycle
bases in graphs characterization, algorithms, complexity, and applications. Comp. Sci. Rev., 3, 199–243.
76. Grifﬁn, C. (2017) Graph Theory: Penn State Math 485 Lecture Notes. http://www.personal.psu.edu/cxg286/
Math485.pdf (last accessed 22 February 2018). (These notes include contributions by S Shekhar.)
77. Horton, J. D. (1987) A polynomial-time algorithm to ﬁnd the shortest cycle basis of a graph. SIAM J. Comput.,
16, 358–366.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

553

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

78. Mehlhorn, K. & Michail, D. (2007) Implementing minimum cycle basis algorithms. J. Exp. Algorithmics
11, 1–14.
79. Walker, D. M., Tordesillas, A. & Froyland, G. (2014) Mesoscale and macroscale kinetic energy ﬂuxes
from granular fabric evolution. Phys. Rev. E, 89, 032205.
80. Walker, D. M., Tordesillas, A., Brodu, N., Dijksman, J. A., Behringer, R. P. & Froyland, G. (2015)
Self-assembly in a near-frictionless granular material: conformational structures and transitions in uniaxial
cyclic compression of hydrogel spheres. Soft Matter, 11, 2157–2173.
81. Smart, A. G. & Ottino, J. M. (2008) Evolving loop structure in gradually tilted two-dimensional granular
packings. Phys. Rev. E, 77, 041307.
82. Arévalo, R., Zuriguel, I. & Maza, D. (2009) Topological properties of the contact network of granular
materials. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos, 19, 695–702.
83. Arévalo, R., Zuriguel, I., Trevijano, S. A. & Maza, D. (2010) Third order loops of contacts in a granular
force network. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos, 20, 897–903.
84. Tordesillas, A., Walker, D. M. & Lin, Q. (2010) Force cycles and force chains. Phys. Rev. E, 81, 011302.
85. Rivier, N. (2006) Extended constraints, arches and soft modes in granular materials. J. Non-Cryst. Solids.,
352, 4505–4508.
86. Newman, M. E. J. (2003) The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Rev., 45, 167–256.
87. Barrat, A. & Weigt, M. (2000) On the properties of small-world network models. Eur. Phys. J. B, 13,
547–560.
88. Saramäki, J., Kivelä, M., Onnela, J.-P., Kaski, K. & Kertész, J. (2007) Generalizations of the clustering
coefﬁcient to weighted complex networks. Phys. Rev. E, 75, 027105.
89. Onnela, J.-P., Saramäki, J., Kertész, J. & Kaski, K. (2005) Intensity and coherence of motifs in weighted
complex networks. Phys. Rev. E, 71, 065103.
90. Zhang, B. & Horvath, S. (2005) A general framework for weighted gene co-expression network analysis.
Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol., 4, 17.
91. Freeman, L. C. (1977) A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry, 40, 35–41.
92. Girvan, M. & Newman, M. E. J. (2002) Community structure in social and biological networks. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 7821–7826.
93. Estrada, E. & Rodríguez-Velázquez, J. A. (2005) Subgraph centrality in complex networks. Phys. Rev. E,
71, 056103.
94. Estrada, E., Hatano, N. & Benzi, M. (2012) The physics of communicability in complex networks. Phys.
Rep., 514, 89–119.
95. Estrada, E. & Rodrı́guez-Velázquez, J. A. (2005) Spectral measures of bipartivity in complex networks.
Phys. Rev. E, 72, 046105.
96. Milo, R., Shen-Orr, S. S., Itzkovitz, S., Kashtan, N., Chklovskii, D. & Alon, U. (2002) Network motifs:
simple building blocks of complex networks. Science, 298, 824–827.
97. Shen-Orr, S. S., Milo, R., Mangan, S. & Alon, U. (2002) Network motifs in the transcriptional regulation
network of Escherichia coli. Nat. Genet., 31, 64–68.
98. Milo, R., Itzkovitz, S., Kashtan, N., Levitt, R., Shen-Orr, S., Ayzenshtat, I., Sheffer, M. & Alon, U.
(2004) Superfamilies of evolved and designed networks. Science, 303, 1538–1542.
99. Alon, U. (2007) Network motifs: theory and experimental approaches. Nat. Rev. Genet., 8, 450–461.
100. Schreiber, F. & Schwobbermeyer, H. (2005) Frequency concepts and pattern detection for the analysis of
motifs in networks. Trans. Comput. Syst. Biol., III: 89–104.
101. Wernicke, S. (2006) Efﬁcient detection of network motifs. IEEE/ACM Trans. on Comput. Biol. and Bioinform.,
3, 347–359.
102. Grochow, J. A. & Kellis, M. (2007) Network motif discovery using sub-graph enumeration and symmetrybreaking. In: Speed, T. & Huang, H. (eds). Research in Computational Molecular Biology, Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag, pp. 92–106.
103. Omidi, S., Schreiber, F. & Masoudi-Nejad, A. (2009) MODA: an efﬁcient algorithm for network motif
discovery in biological networks. Genes Genet. Syst., 84, 385–395.

554

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

104. Kashani, Z. R., Ahrabian, H., Elahi, E., Nowzari-Dalini, A., Ansari, E. S., Asadi, S., Mohammadi, S.,
Schreiber, F. & Masoudi-Nejad, A. (2009) Kavosh: a new algorithm for ﬁnding network motifs. BMC
Bioinform., 10, 318.
105. Paulau, P. V., Feenders, C. & Blasius, B. (2015) Motif analysis in directed ordered networks and applications
to food webs. Sci. Rep., 5, 11926.
106. Sporns, O. & Kotter, R. (2004) Motifs in brain networks. PLoS Biol., 2, e369.
107. Xu, X., Zhang, J. & Small, M. (2008) Superfamily phenomena and motifs of networks induced from time
series. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 19601–19605.
108. Walker, D. M., Tordesillas, A., Small, M., Behringer, R. P. & Tse, C. K. (2014) A complex systems
analysis of stick-slip dynamics of a laboratory fault. Chaos, 24, 013132.
109. Walker, D. M., Tordesillas, A., Zhang, J., Behringer, R. P. & Andò, E., Viggiani, G., Druckrey, A. &
Alshibli, K. (2015) Structural templates of disordered granular media. Int. J. Solids Struct., 54, 20–30.
110. Tordesillas, A., Walker, D. M., Froyland, G., Zhang, J. & Behringer, R. P. (2012) Transition dynamics
and magic-number-like behavior of frictional granular clusters. Phys. Rev. E, 86, 011306.
111. Peixoto, T. P. (2018, forthcoming) Bayesian Stochastic Blockmodeling. In: Doreian, P., Batagelj, V. &
Ferligoj, A. (eds). Advances in Network Clustering and Blockmodeling. New York: Wiley, arXiv:1705.10225
[stat.ML].
112. Giusti, C., Papadopoulos, L., Owens, E. T., Daniels, K. E. & Bassett, D. S. (2016) Topological and geometric
measurements of force-chain structure. Phys. Rev. E, 94, 032909.
113. Papadopoulos, L., Puckett, J. G., Daniels, K. E. & Bassett, D. S. (2016) Evolution of network architecture
in a granular material under compression. Phys. Rev. E, 94, 032908.
114. Walker, D. M. & Tordesillas, A. (2012) Taxonomy of granular rheology from grain property networks.
Phys. Rev. E, 85, 011304.
115. Tordesillas, A., Walker, D. M., Andò, E. & Viggiani, G. (2013) Revisiting localized deformation in sand
with complex systems. Proc. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 469 (2152).
116. Walker, D. M. & Tordesillas, A. (2014) Examining overlapping community structures within grain property
networks. 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS). pp. 1275–1278.
117. Walker, D. M., Tordesillas, A., Pucilowski, S., Lin, Q., Rechenmacher, A. L. & Abedi, S. (2012) Analysis of grain-scale measurements of sand using kinematical complex networks. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos, 22,
1230042.
118. Newman, M. E. J. & Girvan, M. (2004) Finding and evaluating community structure in networks. Phys. Rev.
E, 69, 026113.
119. Newman, M. E. J. (2006) Finding community structure in networks using the eigenvectors of matrices. Phys.
Rev. E, 74, 036104.
120. Rosvall, M. & Bergstrom, C. T. (2008) Maps of random walks on complex networks reveal community
structure. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 1118–1123.
121. Clauset, A. (2005) Finding local community structure in networks. Phys. Rev. E, 72, 026132.
122. Jeub, L. G. S., Balachandran, P., Porter, M. A., Mucha, P. J. & Mahoney, W. M. (2015) Think locally,
act locally: the detection of small, medium-sized, and large communities in large networks. Phys. Rev. E, 91,
012821.
123. Ahn, Y. Y., Bagrow, J. P. & Lehmann, S. (2010) Link communities reveal multiscale complexity in networks.
Nature, 466, 761–764.
124. Good, B. H., de Montjoye, Y. A. & Clauset, A. (2010) Performance of modularity maximization in practical
contexts. Phys. Rev. E, 81, 046106.
125. Fortunato, S. & Barthélemy, M. (2007) Resolution limit in community detection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 104, 36–41.
126. Bassett, D. S., Porter, M. A., Wymbs, N. F., Grafton, S. T., Carlson, J. M. & Mucha, P. J. (2013) Robust
detection of dynamic community structure in networks. Chaos, 23, 013142.
127. Newman, M. E. J. (2006) Modularity and community structure in networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 103,
8577–8582.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

555

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

128. Bazzi, M., Porter, M. A., Williams, S., McDonald, M., Fenn, D. J. & Howison, S. D. (2016) Community
detection in temporal multilayer networks, with an application to correlation networks. Multiscale Model.
Simul., 14, 1–41.
129. Sarzynska, M., Leicht, E. A., Chowell, G. & Porter, M. A. (2016) Null models for community detection
in spatially embedded, temporal networks. J. Complex Netw., 4, 363–406.
130. Brandes, U., Delling, D., Gaertler, M., R Görke, Hoefer, M., Nikoloski, Z. & Wagner, D. (2008) On
modularity clustering. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., 20, 172–188.
131. Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J. L., Lambiotte, R. & Lefebvre, E. (2008) Fast unfolding of community
hierarchies in large networks. J. Stat. Mech. Theor. Exper., 2008, P10008.
132. Jeub, L. G. S., Bazzi, M., Jutla, I. S. & Mucha, P. J. (2011–2017) A Generalized Louvain
Method for Community Detection Implemented in Matlab, https://github.com/GenLouvain/GenLouvain;
http://netwiki.amath.unc.edu/GenLouvain/GenLouvain (last accessed 22 February 2018).
133. Lancichinetti, A. & Fortunato, S. (2012) Consensus clustering in complex networks. Sci. Rep., 2, 336.
134. Jeub, L. G. S., Sporns, O. & Fortunato, S. (2018) Multiresolution consensus clustering in networks. Sci.
Rep., 8, article no. 3259.
135. Boccaletti, S., Bianconi, G., Criado, R., Del Genio, C. I., Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Romance, M., SendiñaNadal, I., Wang, Z. & Zanin, M. (2014) The structure and dynamics of multilayer networks. Phys. Rep., 544,
1–122.
136. Mucha, P. J., Richardson, T., Macon, K., Porter, M. A. & Onnela, J.-P. (2010) Community structure in
time-dependent, multiscale, and multiplex networks. Science, 328, 876–878.
137. De Domenico, M., Solé-Ribalta, A., Cozzo, E., Kivelä, M., Moreno, Y., Porter, M. A., Gomez, S. &
Arenas, A. (2013) Mathematical formulation of multilayer networks. Phys. Rev. X, 3, 041022.
138. Kolda, T. G. & Bader, B. W. (2009) Tensor decompositions and applications. SIAM Rev., 51, 455–500.
139. Cranmer, S. J., Menninga, E. J. & Mucha, P. J. (2015) Kantian fractionalization predicts the conﬂict propensity
of the international system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 112, 11812–11816.
140. Danchev, V. & Porter, M. A. (2018) Neither global nor local: heterogeneous connectivity in spatial network
structures of world migration. Soc. Netw., 53, 4–19.
141. Bassett, D. S., Wymbs, N. F., Porter, M. A., Mucha, P. J., Carlson, J. M. & Grafton, S. T. (2011)
Dynamic reconﬁguration of human brain networks during learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 108,
7641–7646.
142. Bassett, D. S.,Yang, M., Wymbs, N. F. & Grafton, S. T. (2015) Learning-induced autonomy of sensorimotor
systems. Nat. Neurosci., 18, 744–751.
143. Braun, U., Schafer, A., Walter, H., Erk, S., Romanczuk-Seiferth, N., Haddad, L., Schweiger, J. I.,
Grimm, O., Heinz, A., Tost, H., Meyer-Lindenberg, A. & Bassett, D. S. (2015) Dynamic reconﬁguration of frontal brain networks during executive cognition in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 112,
11678–11683.
144. Blinder, P., Tsai, P. S., Kaufhold, J. P., Knutsen, P. M., Suhl, H. & Kleinfeld, D. (2013) The cortical
angiome: an interconnected vascular network with noncolumnar patterns of blood ﬂow. Nat. Neurosci., 16,
889–897.
145. Katifori, E., Szöllősi, G. J. & Magnasco, M. O. (2010) Damage and ﬂuctuations induce loops in optimal
transport networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104, 048704.
146. Lee, S. H., Fricker, M. D. & Porter, M. A. (2017) Mesoscale analyses of fungal networks as an approach
for quantifying phenotypic traits. J. Complex Netw., 5, 145–159.
147. Bebber, D. P., Hynes, J., Darrah, P. R., Boddy, L. & Fricker, M. D. (2007) Biological solutions to transport
network design. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci., 274, 2307–2315.
148. Banavar, J. R., Colaiori, F., Flammini, A., Maritan, A. & Rinaldo, A. (2000) Topology of the ﬁttest
transportation network. Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 4745–4748.
149. Gastner, M. T. & Newman, M. E. J. (2006) Optimal design of spatial distribution networks. Phys. Rev. E, 74,
016117.

556

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

150. Kurant, M. & Thiran, P. (2006) Extraction and analysis of trafﬁc and topologies of transportation networks.
Phys. Rev. E, 74, 036114.
151. Bertsekas, D. P. (1998) Network Optimization: Continuous and Discrete Models. Belmont, MA, USA: Athena
Scientiﬁc.
152. Ahuja, R. K., Magnanti, T. L. & Orlin, J. B. (1993) Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications.
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
153. Kaczynski, T., Mischaikow, K. & Mrozek, M. (2004) Computational Homology. Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag.
154. Kesten, H. (2006) What is ... percolation? Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 53, 572–573.
155. Stauffer, D. & Aharony, A. (1994) Introduction to Percolation Theory. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press.
156. Saberi, A. A. (2015) Recent advances in percolation theory and its applications. Phys. Rep., 578,
1–32.
157. Broadbent, S. & Hammersley, J. (1957) Percolation processes I. Crystals and mazes. Proc. Camb. Philos.
Soc., 53, 629–641.
158. Albert, R. & Barabási, A.-L. (2002) Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys., 74, 47–98.
159. Erdős, P. & Reńyi, A. (1959) On random graphs I. Publ. Math. Debrecen, 6, 290–297.
160. Erdős, P. & Reńyi, A. (1960) On the evolution of random graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hungarian Acad. Sci., 5,
17–61.
161. Stauffer, D. (1979) Scaling theory of percolation clusters. Phys. Rep., 54, 1–74.
162. Slotterback, S., Mailman, M., Ronaszegi, K., van Hecke, M., Girvan, M. & Losert, W. (2012) Onset of
irreversibility in cyclic shear of granular packings. Phys. Rev. E, 85, 021309.
163. Kondic, L., Goullet, A., O’Hern, C. S., Kramár, M., Mischaikow, K. & Behringer, R. P. (2012) Topology
of force networks in compressed granular media. Europhys. Lett., 97, 54001.
164. Kramár, M., Goullet, A., Kondic, L. & Mischaikow, K. (2013) Persistence of force networks in compressed
granular media. Phys. Rev. E, 87, 042207.
165. Kramár, M., Goullet, A., Kondic, L. & Mischaikow, K. (2014) Quantifying force networks in particulate
systems. Phys. D, 283, 37–55.
166. Kramár, M., Goullet, A., Kondic, L. & Mischaikow, K. (2014) Evolution of force networks in dense
particulate media. Phys. Rev. E, 90, 052203.
167. Ardanza-Trevijano, S., Zuriguel, I.,Arévalo, R. & Maza, D. (2014) Topological analysis of tapped granular
media using persistent homology. Phys. Rev. E, 89, 052212.
168. Kondic, L., Kramár, M., Pugnaloni, L. A., Carlevaro, C. M. & Mischaikow, K. (2016) Structure of force
networks in tapped particulate systems of disks and pentagons. II. Persistence analysis. Phys. Rev. E, 93,
062903.
169. Pugnaloni, L. A., Carlevaro, C. M., Kramár, M., Mischaikow, K. & Kondic, L. (2016) Structure of force
networks in tapped particulate systems of disks and pentagons. I. Clusters and loops. Phys. Rev. E, 93, 062902.
170. Feng, S. (1985) Percolation properties of granular elastic networks in two dimensions. Phys. Rev. B, 32,
510–513.
171. Moukarzel, C. & Duxbury, P. M. (1995) Stressed backbone and elasticity of random central-force systems.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 75, 4055–4058.
172. Jacobs, D. & Thorpe, M. F. (1995) Generic rigidity percolation: the pebble game. Phys. Rev. Lett., 75,
4051–4054.
173. Aharonov, E. & Sparks, D. (1999) Rigidity phase transition in granular packings. Phys. Rev. E, 60,
6890–6896.
174. Lois, G., Blawzdziewicz, J. & O’Hern, C. S. (2008) Jamming transition and new percolation universality
classes in particulate systems with attraction. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 028001.
175. Shen, T., O’Hern, C. S. & Shattuck, M. D. (2012) Contact percolation transition in athermal particulate
systems. Phys. Rev. E, 85, 011308.
176. Kovalcinova, L., Goullet, A. & Kondic, L. (2015) Percolation and jamming transitions in particulate systems
with and without cohesion. Phys. Rev. E, 92, 032204.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

557

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

177. Henkes, S., Quint, D. A., Fily, Y. & Schwarz, J. M. (2016) Rigid cluster decomposition reveals criticality in
frictional jamming. Phy.s Rev. Lett., 116, 028301.
178. Thorpe, M. F. (1985) Rigidity Percolation. In: Adler, D., Fritzsche, H. & Ovshinsky, S. R. (eds).
Physics of Disordered Materials. Institute for Amorphous Studies Series. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag,
pp. 55–61.
179. Thorpe, M. F. & Duxbury, P. M. (eds). (1999) Rigidity Theory and Applications. Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag.
180. Kovalcinova, L., Goullet, A. & Kondic, L. (2016) Scaling properties of force networks for compressed
particulate systems. Phys. Rev. E, 93, 042903.
181. Pastor-Satorras, R. & Miguel, M.-C. (2012) Percolation analysis of force networks in anisotropic granular
matter. J. Stat. Mech. Theor. Exper., 2012, P02008.
182. Pathak, S. N., Esposito, V., Coniglio, A. & Ciamarra, M. P. (2017) Force percolation transition of jammed
granular systems. Phys. Rev. E, 96, 042901.
183. Edelsbrunner, H. (2010) Computational Topology: An Introduction. Providence, RI, USA: American
Mathematical Society.
184. Carlsson, G. (2009) Topology and data. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 46, 255–308.
185. Ghrist, R. (2014) Elementary Applied Topology. Ed. 1.0, Createspace. https://www.math.upenn.edu/∼ghrist/
notes.html (last accessed 22 February 2018).
186. Dlotko, P., Juda, M., Mrozek, M. & Ghrist, R. (2012) Distributed computation of coverage in sensor
networks by homological methods. Appl. Algebr. Eng. Comm., 23, 29–58.
187. Taylor, D., Klimm, F., Harrington, H. A., Kramár, M., Mischaikow, K., Porter, M. A. & Mucha, P. J.
(2015) Topological data analysis of contagion maps for examining spreading processes on networks. Nat.
Commun., 6, 7723.
188. Sizemore, A., Giusti, C. & Bassett, D. S. (2017) Classiﬁcation of weighted networks through mesoscale
homological features. J. Complex Netw., 5, 245.
189. Sizemore, A., Giusti, C., Kahn, A. E., Betzel, R. F. & Bassett, D. S. (2017) Cliques and cavities in the
human connectome. J. Comput. Neurosci. doi:10.1007/s10827-017-0672-6.
190. Otter, N., Porter, M. A., Tullmann, U., Grindrod, P. & Harrington, H. A. (2017) A roadmap for the
computation of persistent homology. EPJ Data Sci., 6, 17.
191. Patania, A., Vaccarino, F. & Petri, G. (2017) Topological analysis of data. EPJ Data Sci., 6, 7.
192. Stolz, B. J., Harrington, H. A. & Porter, M. A. (2017) Persistent homology of time-dependent functional
networks constructed from coupled time series. Chaos, 27, 047410.
193. Kozlov, D. (2007) Combinatorial Algebraic Topology, Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
194. Nanda, V. & Sazdanović, R. (2014) Simplicial Models and Topological Inference in Biological Systems. In:
Jonoska, N. & Saito, M. (eds). Discrete and Topological Models in Molecular Biology. Natural Computing
Series. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, pp. 109–141.
195. Petri, G., Scolamiero, M., Donato, I. & Vaccarino, F. (2013) Topological strata of weighted complex
networks. PLoS One, 8, 1–8.
196. Dantu, P. (1957) Contribution l’étude méchanique et géométrique des milieux pulvérulents. Proceedings of
the Fourth International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, London. pp. 144–148.
197. Drescher, A. & de Josselin de Jong, G. (1972) Photoelastic veriﬁcation of a mechanical model for ﬂow of a
granular material. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 20, 337–340.
198. Luding, S. (1997) Stress distribution in static two-dimensional granular model media in the absence of friction.
Phys. Rev. E, 55, 4720.
199. Silbert, L. E., Grest, G. S. & Landry, J. W. (2002) Statistics of the contact network in frictional and
frictionless granular packings. Phys. Rev. E, 66, 061303.
200. Tordesillas, A. (2007) Force chain buckling, unjamming transitions and shear banding in dense granular
assemblies. Philos. Mag., 87, 4987–5016.
201. Majmudar, T. S., Sperl, M., Luding, S. & Behringer, R. P. (2007) Jamming transition in granular systems.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 98, 058001.

558

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

202. Snoeijer, J. H., Vlugt, T. J. H., van Hecke, M. and van Saarloos, W. (2004) Force network ensemble: a
new approach to static granular matter. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 54302.
203. Snoeijer, J. H., Vlugt, T. J. H., Ellenbroek, W. G., Van Hecke, M. & Van Leeuwen, J. M. J. (2004) Ensemble
theory for force networks in hyperstatic granular matter. Phys. Rev. E, 70, 61306.
204. Tighe, B. P., Snoeijer, J. H., Vlugt, T. J. H. & van Hecke, M. (2010) The force network ensemble for granular
packings. Soft Matter, 6, 2908–2917.
205. Kollmer, J. E. & Daniels, K. E. (2017) An experimental investigation of the force network ensemble. Powders
and Grains 2017, 140, 02024.
206. Liu, A. J., Nagel, S. R., Van Saarloos, W. & Wyart, M. (2011) The Jamming Scenario—An Introduction
and Outlook. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
207. Henkes, S., van Hecke, M. & van Saarloos, W. (2010) Critical jamming of frictional grains in the generalized
isostaticity picture. Europhys. Lett., 90, 14003.
208. Shundyak, K., van Hecke, M. & van Saarloos, W. (2007) Force mobilization and generalized isostaticity
in jammed packings of frictional grains. Phys. Rev. E, 75, 010301.
209. Stumpf, M. P. & Porter, M. A. (2012) Mathematics. Critical truths about power laws. Science, 335, 665–666.
210. Tordesillas, A., O’Sullivan, P., Walker, D. M. & Paramitha. (2010) Evolution of functional connectivity
in contact and force chain networks: feature vectors, k-cores and minimal cycles. C. R. Mécanique, 338,
556–569.
211. Duxbury, P., Jacobs, D., Thorpe, M. & Moukarzel, C. (1999) Floppy modes and the free energy: rigidity
and connectivity percolation on Bethe lattices. Phys. Rev. E, 59, 2084–2092.
212. Maxwell, J. C. (1864) On the calculation of the equilibrium and stiffness of frames. Philos. Mag. Ser. 4, 27,
294–299.
213. Laman, G. (1970) On graphs and rigidity of plane skeletal structures. J. Eng. Math., 4, 331–340.
214. Asimow, L. & Roth, B. (1978) The rigidity of graphs. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 245, 279–289.
215. Crapo, H. (1979) Structural rigidity. Struct. Topol., 1, 26–45.
216. Guyon, E., Roux, S., Hansen, A., Bideau, D., Troadec, J.-P. & Crapo, H. (1990) Non-local and non-linear
problems in the mechanics of disordered systems: application to granular media and rigidity problems. Rep.
Prog. Phys., 53, 373.
217. Moukarzel, C. F. (1998) Isostatic phase transition and instability in stiff granular materials. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
81, 1634–1637.
218. Tordesillas, A., Lin, Q., Zhang, J., Behringer, R. P. & Shi, J. (2011) Structural stability and jamming of
self-organized cluster conformations in dense granular materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 59, 265–296.
219. Tordesillas, A., Pucilowski, S., Walker, D. M., Peters, J. & Hopkins, M. (2012) A complex network
analysis of granular fabric evolution in three-dimensions. Dynam. Cont. Dis. Ser. B, 19, 417–495.
220. Walker, D. M., Tordesillas, A., Ren, J., Dijksman, J. A. & Behringer, R. P. (2014) Uncovering temporal
transitions and self-organization during slow aging of dense granular media in the absence of shear bands.
Europhys. Lett., 107, 18005, 2014.
221. Jeng, M. & Schwarz, J. M. (2008) On the study of jamming percolation. J. Stat. Phys., 131, 575–595.
222. Jeng, M. & Schwarz, J. M. (2010) Force-balance percolation. Phys. Rev. E, 81, 011134.
223. Cao, L. & Schwarz, J. M. (2012) Correlated percolation and tricriticality. Phys. Rev. E, 86, 061131.
224. Lopez, J. H., Cao, L. & Schwarz, J. M. (2013) Jamming graphs: a local approach to global mechanical rigidity.
Phys. Rev. E, 88, 062130.
225. Heroy, S., Taylor, D., Shi, F. B., Forest, M. G. & Mucha, P. J. (2017) Rigid graph compression: motif-based
rigidity analysis for disordered ﬁber networks. arXiv:1711.05790 [cond-mat.dis-nn].
226. Oda, M. & Kazama, H. (1998) Microstructure of shear bands and its relation to the mechanisms of dilatancy
and failure of dense granular soils. Géotechnique, 48, 465–481.
227. Tordesillas, A., Zhang, J. & Behringer, R. (2009) Buckling force chains in dense granular assemblies:
physical and numerical experiments. Geomech. Geoeng., 4, 3–16.
228. Bagi, K. (2007) On the concept of jammed conﬁgurations from a structural mechanics perspective. Granular
Matter, 9, 109–134.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

559

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

229. Tordesillas, A. & Muthuswamy, M. (2009) On the modeling of conﬁned buckling of force chains. J. Mech.
Phys. Solids, 57, 706–727.
230. Cates, M. E., Wittmer, J. P., Bouchaud, J.-P. & Claudin, P. (1998) Jamming, force chains, and fragile matter.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 81, 1841–1844.
231. Muthuswamy, M. & Tordesillas, A. (2006) How do interparticle contact friction, packing density and degree
of polydispersity affect force propagation in particulate assemblies? J. Stat. Mech. Theor. Exper., 2006, P09003.
232. Kob, W. & Barrat, J. L. (1997) Aging effects in a Lennard-Jones glass. Phys. Rev. Lett., 78, 4581–4584.
233. Kabla, A. & Debregeas, G. (2004) Contact dynamics in a gently vibrated granular pile. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92,
35501.
234. Steinhardt, P. J., Nelson, D. R. & Ronchetti, M. (1983) Bond-orientational order in liquids and glasses.
Phys. Rev. B, 28, 784–805.
235. Arévalo, R., Pugnaloni, L. A., Zuriguel, I. & Maza, D. (2013) Contact network topology in tapped granular
media. Phys. Rev. E, 87, 022203.
236. Nowak, E. R., Knight, J. B., Ben-Naim, E., Jaeger, H. M. & Nagel, S. R. (1998) Density ﬂuctuations in
vibrated granular materials. Phys. Rev. E, 57, 1971–1982.
237. Pugnaloni, L. A., Sánchez, I., Gago, P. A., Damas, J., Zuriguel, I. & Maza, D. (2010) Towards a relevant
set of state variables to describe static granular packings. Phys. Rev. E, 82, 050301.
238. Pugnaloni, L. A., Mizrahi, M., Carlevaro, C. M. & Vericat, F. (2008) Nonmonotonic reversible branch in
four model granular beds subjected to vertical vibration. Phys. Rev. E, 78, 051305.
239. Gago, P. A., Bueno, N. E. & Pugnaloni, L. A. (2009) High intensity tapping regime in a frustrated lattice gas
model of granular compaction. Granular Matter, 11, 365–369.
240. Carlevaro, C. M. & Pugnaloni, L. A. (2011) Steady state of tapped granular polygons. J. Stat. Mech. Theor.
Exper., 2011, P01007.
241. Arévalo, R., Pugnaloni, L. A., Maza, D. & Zuriguel, I. (2013) Tapped granular packings described as
complex networks. Philos. Mag., 93, 4078–4089.
242. Itzkovitz, S. & Alon, U. (2005) Subgraphs and network motifs in geometric networks. Phys. Rev. E, 71,
026117.
243. Shoval, O. & Alon, U. (2010) SnapShot: network motifs. Cell, 143, 326–326.e1.
244. Brodu, N., Dijksman, J. A. & Behringer, R. P. (2015) Spanning the scales of granular materials through
microscopic force imaging. Nat. Commun., 6, 6361.
245. Dijksman, J. A., Brodu, N. & Behringer, R. P. (2017) Refractive index matched scanning and detection of
soft particles. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 88, 051807.
246. Sepiani, H. A. & Ghazavi, A. (2009) A thermo-micro-mechanical modeling for smart shape
memory alloy woven composite under in-plane biaxial deformation. Int. J. Mech. Mater. Design,
5, 111.
247. Tighe, B. P. & Vlugt, T. J. H. (2011) Stress ﬂuctuations in granular force networks. J. Stat. Mech. Theor.
Exper., 2011, P04002.
248. Daniels, K. E., Kollmer, J. E. & Puckett, J. G. (2017) Photoelastic force measurements in granular materials.
Rev. Sci. Instrum., 88, 051808.
249. Hurley, R. C., Hall, S. A. &rade, J. E. & Wright, J. (2016) Quantifying interparticle forces and heterogeneity
in 3D granular materials. Phys. Rev. Lett., 117, 098005.
250. Mukhopadhyay, S. & Peixinho, J. (2011) Packings of deformable spheres. Phys. Rev. E, 84, 011302.
251. Saadatfar, M., Sheppard, A. P., Senden, T. J. & Kabla, A. J. (2012) Mapping forces in a 3D elastic assembly
of grains. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 60, 55–66.
252. Pöschel, T. & Schwager, T. (2005) Computational Granular Dynamics: Models and Algorithms. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
253. Weis, S. & Schröter, M. (2017) Analyzing X-ray tomographies of granular packings. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 88,
051809.
254. Tordesillas, A. & Muthuswamy, M. (2008) A thermomicromechanical approach to multiscale continuum
modeling of dense granular materials. Acta Geotechnica, 3, 225–240.

560

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

255. Huang, Y. & Daniels, K. E. (2016) Friction and pressure-dependence of force chain communities in granular
materials. Granular Matter, 18, 85.
256. Navakas, R., Džiugys, A. & Peters, B. (2014) A community-detection based approach to identiﬁcation of
inhomogeneities in granular matter. Phys. A, 407, 312–331.
257. Walker, D. M., Tordesillas, A., Einav, I. & Small, M. (2011) Complex networks in conﬁned comminution.
Phys. Rev. E, 84, 021301.
258. Radjai, F., Roux, S. & Moreau, J. J. (1999) Contact forces in a granular packing. Chaos, 9,
544–550.
259. Peña, A. A., Herrmann, H. J. & Lind, P. G. (2009) Force chains in sheared granular media of irregular
particles. AIP Conf. Proc., 1145, 321–324.
260. Ostojic, S., Vlugt, T. J. H. & Nienhuis, B. (2007) Universal anisotropy in force networks under shear. Phys.
Rev. E, 75, 030301.
261. Kondic, L., Kramár, M., Kovalčinová, L. & Mischaikow, K. (2017) Evolution of force networks in dense
granular matter close to jamming. EPJ Web. Conf., 140, 15014.
262. Takahashi, T., Clark, A. H., Majmudar, T. & Kondic, L. (2018) Granular response to impact: topology of
the force networks. Phys. Rev. E, 97, 012906.
263. Lim, M. X. & Behringer, R. P. (2017) Topology of force networks in granular media under impact. Europhys.
Lett., 120, 44003.
264. Tordesillas, A., Tobin, S. T., Cil, M., Alshibli, K. & Behringer, R. P. (2015) Network ﬂow model of force
transmission in unbonded and bonded granular media. Phys. Rev. E, 91, 062204.
265. Tordesillas, A., Pucilowski, S., Tobin, S., Kuhn, M. R., Andò, E., Viggiani, G., Druckrey, A. & Alshibli,
K. (2015) Shear bands as bottlenecks in force transmission. Europhys. Lett., 110, 58005.
266. Tordesillas, A., Cramer, A. & Walker, D. M. (2013) Minimum cut and shear bands. AIP Conf. Proc., 1542,
507–510.
267. Lin, Q. & Tordesillas, A. (2013) Constrained optimisation in granular network ﬂows: games with a loaded
dice. AIP Conf. Proc., 1542, 547–550.
268. Lin, Q. & Tordesillas, A. (2014) Towards an optimization theory for deforming dense granular materials:
minimum cost maximum ﬂow solutions. J. Ind. Manag. Optim., 10, 337–362.
269. Walker, D. M. & Tordesillas, A. (2013) Understanding multi-scale structural evolution in granular systems
through gmems. AIP Conf. Proc., 1542, 145–148.
270. Zhang, J. & Small, M. (2006) Complex network from pseudoperiodic time series: topology versus dynamics.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 238701.
271. Yang, Y. & Yang, H. (2008) Complex network-based time series analysis. Phys. A, 387, 1381–1386.
272. Lacasa, L., Luque, B., Ballesteros, F., Luque, J. & Nuño, J. C. (2008) From time series to complex
networks: the visibility graph. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 4972–4975.
273. Gao, Z. & Jin, N. (2009) Complex network from time series based on phase space reconstruction. Chaos, 19,
033137.
274. Marwan, N., Donges, J. F., Zou, Y., Donner, R. V. & Kurths, J. (2009) Complex network approach for
recurrence analysis of time series. Phys. Lett. A, 373, 4246–4254.
275. MacKay, D. J. C. (2003) Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
276. Rechenmacher, A. L. (2006) Grain-scale processes governing shear band initiation and evolution in sands.
J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 54, 22–45.
277. Rechenmacher, A. L., Abedi, S. & Chupin, O. (2010) Evolution of force chains in shear bands in sands.
Géotechnique, 60, 343–351.
278. Andò, E., Hall, S. A., Viggiani, G., Desrues, J. & P Bésuelle. (2012) Grain-scale experimental investigation
of localised deformation in sand: a discrete particle tracking approach. Acta Geotechnica, 7, 1–13.
279. Amon, A., Born, P., Daniels, K. E., Dijksman, J. A., Huang, K., Parker, D., Schröter, M., Stannarius,
R. & Wierschem, A. (2017) Preface: Focus on imaging methods in granular physics. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 88,
051701.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

561

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

280. Stannarius, R. (2017) Magnetic resonance imaging of granular materials. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 88,
051806.
281. Porter, M. A., Kevrekidis, P. G. & Daraio, C. (2015) Granular crystals: nonlinear dynamics meets materials
engineering. Phys. Today, 68, 44.
282. Cundall, P. A. & Strack, O. D. L. (1979) Discrete numerical-model for granular assemblies. Géotechnique,
29, 47–65.
283. Papanikolaou, S., O’Hern, C. S. & Shattuck, M. D. (2013) Isostaticity at frictional jamming. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 110, 198002.
284. Somfai, E., Roux, J. N., Snoeijer, J. H., van Hecke, M. & van Saarloos, W. (2005) Elastic wave propagation
in conﬁned granular systems. Phys. Rev. E, 72, 21301.
285. Rosvall, M., Esquivel, A. V., Lancichinetti, A., West, J. D. & Lambiotte, R. (2014) Memory in network
ﬂows and its effects on spreading dynamics and community detection. Nat. Commun., 5, 4630.
286. Holme, P. (2015) Modern temporal network theory: a colloquium. Eur. Phys. J. B, 88, 234.
287. Butts, C. T. (2009) Revisiting the foundations of network analysis. Science, 325, 414–6.
288. Gravish, N., Franklin, S. V., Hu, D. L. & Goldman, D. I. (2012) Entangled granular media. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
108, 208001.
289. Murphy, K. A., Reiser, N., Choksy, D., Singer, C. E. & Jaeger, H. M. (2016) Freestanding loadbearing
structures with Z-shaped particles. Granular Matter, 18, 26.
290. Cruz Hidalgo, R., Zuriguel, I., Maza, D. & Pagonabarraga, I. (2009) Role of particle shape on the stress
propagation in granular packings. Phys. Rev. Lett., 103, 118001.
291. Trepanier, M. & Franklin, S. V. (2010) Column collapse of granular rods. Phys. Rev. E, 82, 011308.
292. Schreck, C. F., Xu, N. & O’Hern, C. S. (2010) A comparison of jamming behavior in systems composed of
dimer- and ellipse-shaped particles. Soft Matter, 6, 2960–2969.
293. Athanassiadis, A. G., Miskin, M. Z., Kaplan, P., Rodenberg, N., Lee, S. H., Merritt, J., Brown, E., Amend,
J., Lipson, H. & Jaeger, H. M. (2014) Particle shape effects on the stress response of granular packings. Soft
Matter, 10, 48–59.
294. Harrington, M. & Durian, D. J. (2018) Anisotropic particles strengthen granular pillars under compression.
Phys. Rev. E, 97, 012904.
295. Azéma, E., Radjai, F. & Dubois, F. (2013) Packings of irregular polyhedral particles: strength, structure, and
effects of angularity. Phys. Rev. E, 87, 062203.
296. Gómez, S., Jensen, P. & Arenas, A. (2009) Analysis of community structure in networks of correlated data.
Phys. Rev. E, 80, 016114.
297. Traag, V. A. & Bruggeman, J. (2009) Community detection in networks with positive and negative links.
Phys. Rev. E, 80, 036115.
298. Zhang, S., Bassett, D. S. & Winkelstein, B. A. (2016) Stretch-induced network reconﬁguration of collagen
ﬁbers in the human facet capsular ligament. J. R. Soc. Interface, 13, 20150883.
299. Puckett, J. G. & Daniels, K. E. (2013) Equilibrating temperaturelike variables in jammed granular
subsystems. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110, 058001.
300. Shaebani, M. R., Madadi, M., Luding, S. & Wolf, D. E. (2012) Inﬂuence of polydispersity on micromechanics
of granular materials. Phys. Rev. E, 85, 011301.
301. Kumar, N., Magnanimo, V., Ramaioli, M. & Luding, S. (2016) Tuning the bulk properties of bidisperse
granular mixtures by small amount of ﬁnes. Powder Technol., 293, 94–112.
302. Slanina, F. (2017) Localization in random bipartite graphs: numerical and empirical study. Phys. Rev. E, 95,
052149.
303. Harary, F. (1972) Graph Theory. Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley.
304. Shi, F., Wang, S., Forest, M. G. & Mucha, P. J. (2013) Percolation-induced exponential scaling in the large
current tails of random resistor networks. Multiscale Model. Simul., 11, 1298–1310.
305. Shi, F., Wang, S., Forest, M. G., Mucha, P. J. & Zhou, R. (2014) Network-based assessments of percolationinduced current distributions in sheared rod macromolecular dispersions. Multiscale Model. Simul., 12,
249–264.

562

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

306. Abhilash, A. S., Baker, B. M., Trappmann, B., Chen, C. S. & Shenoy, V. B. (2014) Remodeling of ﬁbrous
extracellular matrices by contractile cells: predictions from discrete ﬁber network simulations. Biophys. J, 107,
1829–1840.
307. Purohit, P. K., Litvinov, R. I., Brown, A. E., Discher, D. E. & Weisel, J. W. (2011) Protein unfolding
accounts for the unusual mechanical behavior of ﬁbrin networks. Acta Biomater., 7, 2374–2783.
308. Bullmore, E. & Sporns, O. (2009) Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and
functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 10, 186–198.
309. Blunt, M. J. (2001) Flow in porous media—pore-network models and multiphase ﬂow. Curr. Opin. Colloid
Interface Sci., 6, 197–207.
310. Al-Raoush, R., Thompson, K. & Willson, C. S. (2003) Comparison of network generation techniques for
unconsolidated porous media. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. J., 67, 1687–1700.
311. Vo, K., Walker, D. M. & Tordesillas, A. (2013) Transport pathways within percolating pore space networks
of granular materials. AIP Conf. Proc., 1542, 551–554.
312. Walker, D. M., Vo, K. & Tordesillas, A. (2013) On reynolds’ dilatancy and shear band evolution: a new
perspective. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos, 23, 1330034.
313. van der Linden, J. H., Narsilio, G. A. & Tordesillas, A. (2016) Machine learning framework for analysis
of transport through complex networks in porous, granular media: a focus on permeability. Phys. Rev. E, 94,
022904.
314. Russell, S., Walker, D. M. & Tordesillas, A. (2016) A characterization of the coupled evolution of grain
fabric and pore space using complex networks: pore connectivity and optimized ﬂows in the presence of shear
bands. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 88, 227–251.
315. Jimenez-Martinez, J. & Negre, C. F. A. (2017) Eigenvector centrality for geometric and topological
characterization of porous media. Phys. Rev. E, 96, 013310.
316. Laubie, H., Radjai, F., Pellenq, R. & Ulm, F. J. (2017) Stress transmission and failure in disordered porous
media. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119, 075501.
317. Newman, M. E. J. & Clauset, A. (2016) Structure and inference in annotated networks. Nat. Commun., 7,
11863.
318. Hric, D., Peixoto, T. P. & Fortunato, S. (2016) Network structure, metadata, and the prediction of missing
nodes and annotations. Phys. Rev. X, 6, 031038.
319. Palla, G., Farkas, I. J., Pollner, P., Derenyi, I. & Vicsek, T. (2008) Fundamental statistical features and
self-similar properties of tagged networks. New. J. Phys., 10, 123026.
320. Edelsbrunner, H. & Harer, J. (2010) Computational Topology: An Introduction. Providence, RI, USA:
American Mathematical Society.
321. Ramola, K. & Chakraborty, B. (2017) Stress response of granular systems. J. Stat. Phys., 169, 1–17.
322. Taylor-King, J. P., Basanta, D., Chapman, S. J. & Porter, M. A. (2017) Mean-ﬁeld approach to evolving
spatial networks, with an application to osteocyte network formation. Phys. Rev. E, 96, 012301.
323. Beguerisse-Diaz, M., Garduno-Hernandez, G., Vangelov, B., Yaliraki, S. N. & Barahona, M. (2014)
Interest communities and ﬂow roles in directed networks: the Twitter network of the UK riots. J. R. Soc.
Interface, 11, 20140940.
324. Bassett, D. S., Greenﬁeld, D. L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Weinberger, D. R., Moore, S. & Bullmore, E.
(2010) Efﬁcient physical embedding of topologically complex information processing networks in brains and
computer circuits. PLoS Comput. Biol., 6, e1000748.
325. Modes, C. D., Magnasco, M. O. & Katifori, E. (2016) Extracting hidden hierarchies in 3D distribution
networks. Phys. Rev. X, 6, 031009.
326. Tighe, B. P., van Eerd, A. R. T. & Vlugt, T. J. H. (2008) Entropy maximization in the force network ensemble
for granular solids. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100, 238001.
327. Ronhovde, P., Chakrabarty, S., Sahu, M., Sahu, K. K., Kelton, K. F., Mauro, N. & Nussinov, Z. (2012)
Detection of hidden structures for arbitrary scales in complex physical systems. Sci. Rep., 2, 329.
328. Agarwala, A. & Shenoy, V. B. (2017) Topological insulators in amorphous systems. Phys. Rev. Lett., 118,
236402.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

563

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

329. Muller, M. K. & Luding, S. (2009) Homogeneous cooling with repulsive and attractive long-range
interactions. Melville, New York, USA, AIP Conf. Proc., 1145, 697–700.
330. Mitarai, N. & Nori, F. (2006) Wet granular materials. Adv. Phys., 55, 1–45.
331. Wrobel, M. R. & Sundararaghavan, H. G. (2014) Directed migration in neural tissue engineering. Tissue
Eng. Part B Rev., 20, 93–105.
332. Huttenlocher, A. & Poznansky, M. C. (2008) Reverse leukocyte migration can be attractive or repulsive.
Trends Cell. Biol., 18, 298–306.
333. Hartveit, E. & Veruki, M. L. (2012) Electrical synapses between all amacrine cells in the retina: function
and modulation. Brain Res., 1487, 160–172.
334. Nualart-Marti, A., Solsona, C. & Fields, R. D. (2013) Gap junction communication in myelinating glia.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1828, 69–78.
335. Pahtz, T., Herrmann, H. J. & Shinbrot, T. (2010) Why do particle clouds generate electric charges? Nat.
Phys., 6, 364–368.
336. Ladoux, B., Nelson, W. J., Yan, J. & Mege, R. M. (2015) The mechanotransduction machinery at work at
Adherens junctions. Integr. Biol. (Camb.), 7, 1109–1119.
337. Bausch, A. R. & Kroy, K. (2006) A bottom-up approach to cell mechanics. Nat. Phys., 2, 231–238.
338. Broedersz, C. P. & MacKintosh, F. C. (2014) Modeling semiﬂexible polymer networks. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
86, 995–1036.
339. Lieleg, O., Schmoller, K. M., Claessens, M. M. & Bausch, A. R. (2009) Cytoskeletal polymer networks:
viscoelastic properties are determined by the microscopic interaction potential of cross-links. Biophys. J., 96,
4725–4732.
340. Fletcher, D. A. & Mullins, R. D. (2010) Cell mechanics and the cytoskeleton. Nature, 463, 485–492.
341. Mizuno, D., Tardin, C., Schmidt, C. F. & MacKintosh, F. C. (2007) Nonequilibrium mechanics of active
cytoskeletal networks. Science, 315, 370–373.
342. Gardel, M. L., Kasza, K. E., Brangwynne, C. P., Liu, J. & Weitz, D. A. (2008) Mechanical response of
cytoskeletal networks. Meth. Cell. Biol., 89, 487–519.
343. Majumdar, S., Foucard, L. C., Levine, A. J. & Gardel, M. L. (2017) Encoding mechano-memories in actin
networks. arXiv:1706.05336 [cond-mat.soft].
344. Billen, J., Wilson, M., Rabinovitch, A. & Baljon, A. R. C. (2009) Topological changes at the gel transition
of a reversible polymeric network. Europhys. Lett., 87, 68003.
345. Kim, O. V., Litvinov, R. I., Weisel, J. W. & Alber, M. S. (2014) Structural basis for the nonlinear mechanics
of ﬁbrin networks under compression. Biomaterials, 35, 6739–6749.
346. Gavrilov, A. A., Komarov, P. V. & Khalatur, P. G. (2015) Thermal properties and topology of epoxy
networks: a multiscale simulation methodology. Macromolecules, 48, 206–212.
347. Liang, L., Jones, C., Chen, S., Sun, B. & Jiao, Y. (2016) Heterogeneous force network in 3D cellularized
collagen networks. Phys. Biol., 13, 066001.
348. Venkatesan, S., Vivek-Ananth, R. P., Sreejith, R. P., Mangalapandi, P., Hassanali, A. A. & Samal, A.
(2017) Network approach towards understanding the crazing in glassy amorphous polymers. arXiv:1710.01996
[cond-mat.soft].
349. Bouzid, M. & Del Gado, E. (2017) Network topology in soft gels: hardening and softening materials.
Langmuir, 34, 773–781.
350. Ahnert, S. E., Grant, W. P. & Pickard, C. J. (2017) Revealing and exploiting hierarchical material structure
through complex atomic networks. NPJ Comput. Mater., 3, 35.
351. Setford, J. (2014) Models of granular networks in two and three dimensions. Undergraduate Thesis, Department of Physics, University of Oxford. http://www.math.ucla.edu/∼mason/research/setford-ﬁnal.pdf (last
accessed 22 February 2018).
352. Alalwan, N., Arenas, A. & Estrada, E. (2018) Communication Melting in Graphs and Complex Networks.
Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.07809.
353. Mülken, O. & Blumen, A. (2011) Continuous-time quantum walks: models for coherent transport on complex
networks. Phys. Rep., 502, 37–87.

564

L. PAPADOPOULOS ET AL.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

354. Bianconi, G. (2015) Interdisciplinary and physics challenges of network theory. Europhys. Lett., 111, 56001.
355. Biamonte, J., Faccin, M. & De Domenico, M. (2017) Complex networks: from classical to quantum.
arXiv:1702.08459 [quant-ph].
356. Boccaletti, S., Latora, V., Moreno, Y., Chavez, M. & Hwang, D.-U. (2006) Complex networks: structure
and dynamics. Phys. Rep., 424, 175–308.
357. Liu, Y. & Zhang, X. (2011) Metamaterials: a new frontier of science and technology. Chem. Soc. Rev., 40,
2494–2507.
358. Turpin, J. P., Bossard, J. A., Morgan, K. L., Werner, D. H. (2014) and Werner, P. L., Reconﬁgurable
and tunable metamaterials: a review of the theory and applications. Int. J. Antennas Propagation, 2014
(429837).
359. Lee, J. H., Singer, J. P. & Thomas, E. L. (2012) Micro-/nanostructured mechanical metamaterials. Adv. Mater.,
24, 4782–4810.
360. Greaves, G. N., Greer, A. L., Lakes, R. S. & Rouxel, T. (2011) Poisson’s ratio and modern materials. Nat.
Mater., 10, 823–837.
361. Rocklin, D. Z., Zhou, S., Sun, K. & Mao, X. (2017) Transformable topological mechanical metamaterials.
Nat. Commun., 8, 14201.
362. Fang, N., Xi, D., Xu, J.,Ambati, M., Srituravanich, W., Sun, C. & Zhang, X. (2006) Ultrasonic metamaterials
with negative modulus. Nat. Mater., 5, 452–456.
363. Nicolaou, Z. G. & Motter, A. E. (2012) Mechanical metamaterials with negative compressibility transitions.
Nat. Mater., 11, 608–613.
364. Simovski, C. R., Belov, P. A., Atrashchenko, A. V. & Kivshar, Y. S. (2012) Wire metamaterials: physics
and applications. Adv. Mater., 24, 4229–4248.
365. Smith, D. R., Pendry, J. B. & Wiltshire, M. C. K. (2004) Metamaterials and negative refractive index. Science,
305, 788–792.
366. Eiben, A. E. & Smith, J. (2015) From evolutionary computation to the evolution of things. Nature, 521,
476–482.
367. A Díaz-Manríquez, Toscano, G., Barron-Zambrano, J. H. & Tello-Leal, E. (2016) A review of surrogate
assisted multiobjective evolutionary algorithms. Comput. Intell. Neurosci., 2016 (9420460).
368. Papadimitriou, C. (2014) Algorithms, complexity, and the sciences. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 111,
15881–15887.
369. Goldberg, D. E. (1989) Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning. Boston, MA,
USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.
370. McGhee, G. R. (1999) Theoretical Morphology: The Concept and its Applications. New York City, NY, USA:
Columbia University Press.
371. Valera, M., Guo, Z., Kelly, P., Matz, S., Cantu, A., Percus, A. G., Hyman, J. D., Srinivasan, G. &
Viswanathan, H. S. (2018) Machine learning for graph-based representations of three-dimensional discrete
fracture networks. Comput. Geosci., doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10596-018-9720-1.
372. Avena-Koenigsberger, A., Goñi, J., Solé, R. & Sporns, O. (2014) Network morphospace. J. R. Soc. Interface,
12 (103).
373. Avena-Koenigsberger, A., Goñi, J., Betzel, R. F., van den Heuvel, M. P., Griffa, A., Hagmann, P.,
Thiran, J.-P. & Sporns, O. (2014) Using pareto optimality to explore the topology and dynamics of the
human connectome. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci., 369 (1653).
374. Goñi, J., Avena-Koenigsberger, A., de Mendizabal, N. V., van den Heuvel, M. P., Betzel, R. F. & Sporns,
O. (2013) Exploring the morphospace of communication efﬁciency in complex networks. PLoS One, 8, e58070.
375. Jaeger, H. M. & de Pablo, J. J. (2016) Perspective: evolutionary design of granular media and block copolymer
patterns. APL Mater., 4, 053209.
376. Miskin, M. Z. & Jaeger, H. M. (2013) Adapting granular materials through artiﬁcial evolution. Nat. Mater.,
12, 326–331.
377. Miskin, M. Z. & Jaeger, H. M. (2014) Evolving design rules for the inverse granular packing problem. Soft
Matter, 10, 3708–3715.

GRANULAR NETWORKS

565

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/comnet/article/6/4/485/4959635 by Grinnell College Library user on 17 March 2022

378. Roth, L. K. & Jaeger, H. M. (2016) Optimizing packing fraction in granular media composed of overlapping
spheres. Soft Matter, 12, 1107–1115.
379. Yan, L., Ravasio, R., Brito, C. & Wyart, M. (2017) Architecture and coevolution of allosteric materials.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 114, 2526–2531.
380. Ellenbroek, W. G., Hagh, V. F., Kumar, A., Thorpe, M. F. & van Hecke, M. (2015) Rigidity loss in disordered
systems: three scenarios. Phys. Rev. Lett., 114, 135501.
381. Goodrich, C. P., Liu, A. J. & Nagel, S. R. (2015) The principle of independent bond-level response: tuning
by pruning to exploit disorder for global behavior. Phys. Rev. Lett., 114, 225501.
382. Rocks, J. W., Pashine, N., Bischofberger, I., Goodrich, C. P., Liu, A. J. & Nagel, S. R. (2017) Designing
allostery-inspired response in mechanical networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 114, 2520–2525.
383. Driscoll, M. M., B Chen, G.-G., Beuman, T. H., Ulrich, S., Nagel, S. R. & Vitelli, V. (2016) The role of
rigidity in controlling material failure. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 113, 10813–10817.
384. Shekhawat, A., Zapperi, S. & Sethna, J. P. (2013) From damage percolation to crack nucleation through
ﬁnite size criticality. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110, 185505.
385. Reid, D. R., Pashine, N., Jaeger, H. M., Liu, A. J., Nagel, S. R. & de Pablo, J. J. (2018) Auxetic metamaterials
from disordered networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, doi:10.1073/pnas.1717442115.
386. Quinn, K. P. & Winkelstein, B. A. (2011) Preconditioning is correlated with altered collagen ﬁber alignment
in ligament. J. Biomech. Eng., 133, 064506–064506.
387. Zhao, R., Chen, C. S. & Reich, D. H. (2014) Force-driven evolution of mesoscale structure in engineered 3D
microtissues and the modulation of tissue stiffening. Biomaterials, 35, 5056–5064.
388. Han, W. M., Heo, S.-J., Driscoll, T. P., Smith, L. J., Mauck, R. L. & Elliott, D. M. (2013) Macro- to
microscale strain transfer in ﬁbrous tissues is heterogeneous and tissue-speciﬁc. Biophys. J., 105, 807–817.
389. Pong, T., Adams, W. J., Bray, M.-A., Feinberg, A. W., Sheehy, S. P., Werdich, A. A. & Parker, K. K. (2011)
Hierarchical architecture inﬂuences calcium dynamics in engineered cardiac muscle. Exp. Biol. Med., 236,
366–373.
390. Sporns, O. (2014) Towards network substrates of brain disorders. Brain, 137, 2117–2118.

