Hierarchical soft measurement of load current and state of charge for future
smart lithium-ion batteries

ABSTRACT
Accurate current measurement is indispensable for the management of lithium-ion battery (LIB), especially for
the state-of-charge (SOC) estimation. However, accurate current sensing is challenging in electric vehicles (EVs)
due to the electromagnetic interference. Moreover, the currents across the parallel branches of battery pack are
even unmeasurable due to the absence of current sensor. Motivated by this, this paper proposes a hierarchical
soft measurement framework for the load current and SOC addressing different degrees of current sensor uncertainty. Rooted from a common least squares (LS)-based state optimization problem, a total least square (TLS)-
based modification is proposed and solved to compensate for the measurement disturbances, and in accordance
to estimate the SOC more accurately. One step further, an input-free optimization method is proposed to coestimate the SOC and load current without using the current measurements. Simulation and experimental results suggest that the proposed hierarchical framework can realize high-fidelity co-estimation of the SOC and
load current, especially in the adverse scenarios of both strong noise corruption and current sensor malfunction/
missing. The encouraging results open new paradigms for both the high-robustness current-free SOC estimation
and the hardware-free soft current measurement of LIB. 

1. Introduction
With the rapid development, the lithium-ion battery (LIB) has earned
its popularity in power storage, electric vehicles (EVs), and portable
electronics, attributed to its unique advantages of high energy/power
density, long life span, and weak memory effects. As the performance of
LIB system is principally determined by the weakest cells, the state-ofcharge (SOC) that indicates the remaining charge of a cell is a critical
state need to be monitored by the battery management system (BMS) to
maintain the safe operation of LIB system [1–3].
SOC estimation has been widely explored in the past years, and the
associated methods can be broadly divided into four categories, i.e.,
open circuit voltage (OCV) method, coulomb counting (CC) method,
artificial intelligence method, and model-based method [4–6]. Except
for the OCV method, it is well recognized that the rest approaches all
depend directly on the accurate measurement of load current of battery.
Unfortunately, accurate current sensing could be quite challenging in
practical EV applications. In the state-of-the-art techniques, the halleffect current sensor and the shunt resistor current sensor are two
major choices widely adopted for the BMS of EV [7]. Nevertheless, these
techniques suffer from two recognized drawbacks for practical use. First,
the current measurements contain remarkable errors due to the heavy
electromagnetic interference and dynamic temperature condition within
the EV environment. Second, the currents across parallel branches of the
pack are not uniformly distributed due to cell inconsistency. It is not
practical to install a physical current sensor for each parallel branch
concerning the high cost. Such limitations have raised practical concerns
and expectations for the BMS design, i.e., how to ensure the fidelity of
SOC estimation with low-quality/noise-corruptive current measurement, or even without current sensors.
For the circumstance of low-quality current measurements, the
exploration of novel current sensing techniques, e.g., on-chip temperature compensation and dynamic error-correction [8], can restore the
measurement quality effectively. However, the installation of the
complicatedly-structured sensor on each cell is not cost-friendly. Alternatively, the model-based SOC estimators have been most studied
attribute to the high robust performance against disturbances. According to the specific model in use, such methods can be further categorized
into electrochemical model-based [9–11] and equivalent circuit model
(ECM)-based estimators [12]. On the premise of well-validated models,
real-time SOC observers have been explored progressively, like Kalman
Filter (KF) family [13–16], particle filter [17–19], H-infinity filter
[20,21], sliding-mode observer [22], proportional integral-based
observer [23], etc. Recent progresses have also transformed the SOC
estimation into solving an optimization problem, which formulates the
well-recognized moving horizon estimator (MHE) [24–26].
In spite of the successful use of existing model-based observers, their
performance in practical scenarios can be deteriorated due to the difficulty in obtaining measurements with sufficient quality under special
environmental constraints. Within this scope, low-quality sensinginduced biases of SOC estimation have been studied for most commonlyused EKF and least squares (LS) method in [27]. It is found that the
sensor errors contribute to persistent estimation biases, and this
contribution is in comparable magnitude to the model uncertainty. To
remedy the impact of sensing noises, the wavelet transform has been
employed to de-noise the corrupted measurements and thus to improve
the accuracy of SOC estimation [28,29]. However, the low-frequency
drifting errors are not likely to be eliminated by the filtering approaches. Moreover, the non-optimized filtering also risks distorting the
original measurements if the parameters of filter are not tuned meticulously. Considering the current measurement offset (CMO), the twostage recursive least squares algorithm has been exploited to deal with
the interference of CMO on parameter identification and SOC estimation
effectively [30].
In practical applications, more adverse conditions can occur where
the current measurement is absolutely unavailable. A typical scenario is
the occurrence of current sensor failure, while routine management
tasks such as SOC estimation have to be ensured. Moreover, the refined
LIB management requires the current flowing across each parallelconnected branch, which is typically not measurable due to the lack of
physical sensors. To this end, few works that focus on the LIB management without using current sensor have been reported in the literature.
Two current estimators based on a Thevenin model and a simple RC
model are respectively proposed in [31,32]. The essence is to design a
filter based on the transfer function of the battery model. In spite of the
simplicity, the intrinsic open-loop mechanism inevitably results in low
robustness to modeling and measurements uncertainty. A current unknown SOC estimation method is proposed by voltage filtering based on
an ECM [33]. However, a primary model is utilized and the frequent
relaxations are ignored, which potentially declines the estimation accuracy. To remedy such deficiencies, a closed-loop unknown input
observer is proposed to estimate the SOC and input current concurrently
based on a second-order RC model [34]. However, it is difficult to meet
all the pre-conditions at the same time in practical applications.
To bridge the above research gap, this paper develops a hierarchical
soft measurement framework for the SOC and load current, oriented for
different degrees of current sensor uncertainty. In particular, the corresponding SOC estimation tasks are transformed into three optimization problems which are solved in a real-time manner with the MHE.
Three primary contributions are made.
First, a hierarchical algorithmic framework is proposed, for the first
time, to realize the accurate soft measurement of battery SOC and load
current. The universal framework provides a series of estimators accounting for different degrees of current sensor uncertainties, i.e., accurate current measurement, heavily-corrupted current measurement,
and no current measurement.
Second, the method from Hierarchy II can ensure high robustness
against the disturbances on current measurements, including both
drifting errors and stochastic noises. The accuracy of SOC estimate is
improved largely compared to conventional methods in the heavy noisecorrupted condition.
Third, the method from Hierarchy III gives a solution for highfidelity co-estimation of the input current and SOC without using the
current sensor. This challenges the entrenched mindset that precise
current measurements are imperative for accurate SOC estimation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The LIB modeling
and parameterization are presented in Section 2. The proposed hierarchical soft-measurement framework is elaborated in Section 3. Simulation and experimental results are discussed in Sections 4 and 5, while the
primary conclusions are drawn in Section 6.

2. Battery modelling
The high-fidelity objective modeling is the prerequisite for any
model-based estimator or controller. A thorough exposition of the
control-oriented models for the LIB can be found in [35]. A wellcompromised model with sufficient simplicity yet simulating the
dominant electrical dynamics of LIB is generally favorable for the
formulated problem. To this end, the first-order RC model shown in
Fig. 1 (a) is used in this paper, where the voltage source is used to
simulate the SOC-dependent OCV, Rs is the ohmic resistance, the parallel
connected Rp and Cp are polarization impedances describing the polarization effects of the LIB.
According to Kirchhoff’s circuit laws and capacitor equation, the
mathematical expression of the first-order RC model is expressed as: 

where IL denotes the load current, z the battery SOC, Cn the nominal
capacity (in Ah), Vp and Vt the polarization and terminal voltage, the
OCV (VOC) is a function of SOC: 

where ci are the coefficients, and m is the polynomial order.
The SOC-OCV test is performed and the commonly-used pulserelaxation approach is used for calibrating Eq. (2) [36]. The curve-fitted
SOC-OCV correlation is plotted against the experimental values in Fig. 1
(b), while the fitted coefficients are summarized in Table. 1.
Define the system input and output as IL and yk = Vt,k, the state as xk
= [Vp,k zk]
T, the standard discrete-time state-space model can be
determined from Eqs. (1.a)–(1.c) by: 

where wk and vk are respectively the zero mean and Gaussian process
and measurement disturbances, whose covariances are Qk and Rk,
respectively. VOC is substituted by the relation between OCV and SOC f
(zk) to interrelate the states with the system output. The reference
matrices are given by: 

The model parameters of the first-order RC model, i.e., Rs, Rp and Cp,
are also SOC-dependent. Therefore, a hybrid pulse test is performed to
calibrate these impedance parameters beforehand. Particularly, hybrid
pulse sequences with charge/discharge pulses (10 s for each) and resting
periods among them (40 s) are imposed on the LIB, and the impedance
parameters of interest are offline identified with the obtained current–voltage responses. As the calibration method is a common one
studied for years, the details are not elaborated herein but can be
referred to the existing works [37].

3. Hierarchical estimation framework
In practical applications, current sensors can be contaminated by
unignorable noises in heavy electromagnetic environments. Even worse,
the current is unmeasurable in the parallel branches of the battery pack
due to the difficulty of sensor installation. Regarding these two harsh
conditions, this section goes further to elaborate a hierarchical coestimation framework for SOC and input current based on the ECM
presented in Section 2. In the proposed hierarchical framework, three
constrained optimization problems are formulated, the solutions of
which provide a series of estimation methods accounting for different
degrees of current sensor uncertainties, i.e., accurate current measurement, heavily-corrupted current measurement, and no current
measurement.
3.1. Hierarchy I: Conventional least squares-based problem formulation
To ease describing the proposed hierarchical algorithmic framework,
a conventional optimization-based SOC estimation method is put forward in this section, as Hierarchy I of the proposed framework. Based on
the general probability theory, it is well-recognized that the optimal
estimation of internal states is a function of the conditional state probability density with knowledge of {yi}k i = 0 and system measurements,

By combining the maximization problem of Eq. (5) with the statespace function of the ECM in Eqs. (3.a-b), a full information optimization for the battery states is given by [38]:
where x0 is the initial system state, P0 is the initial state covariance used
to penalize the deviation of the initial state estimate. Explicitly, the
computational endeavor to solve the formulated optimization problem
builds up rapidly with the enlargement of data length. This has motivated the exploration of the moving horizon framework which is
believed to appeal to real-time embedded applications.
Suppose that a moving time horizon owning a fixed length of n is
defined, then the k-th sampling can be divided into [0, …, tk-n] and [tk,n+1, …, tk]. Bearing this in mind, the full information optimization
problem of Eq. (6) can be reconstructed as: 

It is shown that the first three terms of Eq. (7) are meant to convey
the historical information before the present time horizon, i.e., [0, …, tkn]. The first three terms are used to represent the arrival cost [39]. In
accordance with this, the concerned state estimation problem at time tk
can be expressed as the following nonlinear optimization problem [24]:

where xk− n+1 is the priori state estimate at the first of the time horizon,
which is calculated by the (k − n)-th optimal estimate of states and the
(k − n + 1)-th system measurements. The first term represents the deviation of the initial state from the priori state estimate, and is called the
arrival cost. The second term is the penalty accounting for the deviation
between the measured and estimated terminal voltage calculated by the
estimated SOC and Vp via the Eq. (3.b), and the third term is used to
penalize the mismatch between the optimized estimated state and the
propagated state via Eq. (3.a).
As the errors on the system input are not considered, the SOC estimation method based on Eq. (8) is called LS-MHE for simplicity. It is
expected that the LS-MHE can give optimized estimation if the current
measurements are free from errors. It is also worth noting that the LSMHE has already been studied in the literature thus is not an innovation of this work. However, LS-MHE forms Hierarchy I of the proposed
overall framework, since it lays the foundation for the methods in Hierarchy II and III, which are major contributions of this endeavor.
3.2. Hierarchy II: Total least squares-based problem formulation
The formulation of Eq. (8) gives a universal solution for the state
estimation problem with accurate current measurements. However, as
the current sensor is vulnerable to electromagnetic interference (EMI),
precise current measurements are not always available in practical
application, in contrast, the current measurements are usually contaminated by stochastic noises and drifting errors. In this regard, considering the current measurement errors, by introducing an extended
vector ρ = [xT IL]T, the total least squares (TLS)-based constrained
optimization problem is formulated as: 

the input error term which is added into the objective function to form a
TLS-based problem, M indicates the confidence on the current measurements, xk− n+1 is updated with the estimate of input current at k − n
+ 1. The SOC estimation method based on Eqs. (9. a - f) is called the TLSMHE method for simplicity.
Unlike the problem formulation in Eq. (8), the proposed TLS-MHE
method treats the system input as a decision variable to be estimated
together with states of interest, using the state-space model as a
constraint. Another primary difference is that the state error cost has
been excluded referring to Eq. (8). This is reasonable with the assumption that the noise covariance Q is a zero matrix [40]. Hence, the state
sequence is reconstructed via the process model once the initial state is
optimized, which virtually decreases the solution time. By appropriately
selecting the confidence factor M, the TLS-MHE method is supposed to
accurately estimate the SOC and correct the load current measurements
simultaneously. It is explicit that compared to the LS-MHE, the TLS-MHE
has lower dependence on accurate current measurements, and is more
robust to the disturbance on battery current. Therefore, the TLS-MHE
method is expected to be favorable under the practical in-vehicle condition where the current measurements contain heavy noises.
3.3. Hierarchy III: Current-free constrained problem formulation
The aforementioned TLS-based method surmounts the challenge of
SOC estimation with low-quality current measurements. However, in
the current sensor-less scenario like the parallel topology in a battery
pack, the current across each parallel branch is unmeasurable. In this
circumstance, the input current is expected to be estimated simultaneously with the states of interest via matching the voltage measurements with the aid of the state-space model. In particular, a modified
input-free optimization problem is formulated by: 

It is worth noting that the constraints of Eq. (10) are consistent with
those of the TLS-based method in Section 3.2. The main difference from
the TLS-based method is the absence of input error term in the objective
function, since the unavailability of current information is an underlying
assumption herein. Note that the estimation at each time point relies
only on the latest n terminal voltage measurements, while the historical
measurements are readily contained in the arrival cost. By solving the
finite-horizon optimization problem formulated in Eq. (10), both the
states of interest and the input current can be estimated concurrently. As 
the estimation based on Eq. (10) no longer utilizes the current measurement, it is called current-free MHE for simplicity. Compared to the
methods from Hierarchy I and II, the current-free MHE promises a
unique advantage of estimation without a current sensor. This property
appeals to some special scenarios like current sensor failure or the need
for monitoring cells in the parallel branches of the pack. 

3.4. Universal framework of the hierarchical methodology
The efficient solution of constrained optimization problems defined
in Sections 3.1–3.3 eventually gives rise to a series of estimation
methods accounting for different degrees of current sensor uncertainties. In this paper, the sequential quadratic programming (SQP)
method is employed to solve the involved optimization problems and
thus provide the optimal estimates of SOC and input current at each
iteration. For the sake of simplicity, the algorithmic procedure of the
SQP is not detailed in this paper but can be found in [41].
The proposed hierarchical framework is shown schematically in
Fig. 2. It can be seen that one can always find a solution in response to
different levels of current sensor uncertainty. In particular, the conventional LS-MHE represents “Hierarchy I”, which is preferable for use 
under a favorable condition that the LIB current can be measured very
precisely.
In “Hierarchy II”, the TLS-MHE is employed to estimate the SOC and
correct the current measurements concurrently. It is worth noting that
the current measurements are subjected to heavy noises and drifting
errors due to the dynamic working condition and electromagnetic
interference of in-vehicle environment. Affected by these uncertainties,
the existing estimation methods are easily deteriorated in the estimation
accuracy. In contrast, this method mitigates the reliance on highlyprecise measurement, and thus appeals to a deteriorated condition
that the current and voltage measurements of LIB are low-quality with
large disturbances.
In “Hierarchy”, the proposed current-free MHE eliminates
completely the dependence on the current measurements by coestimating the SOC and load current using only the voltage measurements. This indicates its suitability for use under the most deteriorative
scenario, where the current of LIB is not measurable due to either sensor
breakdown or the difficulty of large-scale sensor installation.

4. Simulation validation
The performance of the proposed framework in comparison with
existing ones in the literature is evaluated with simulations in this section. The merit of simulation is rooted in the full elimination of model
uncertainty, which enables evaluating the algorithms from a purely
theoretical perspective.

4.1. Data acquisition
During the simulation, the federal urban drive schedule (FUDS) is
loaded to excite the battery model, while the load current, terminal
voltage and SOC are sampled at 1 Hz and plotted in Fig. 3. The methods
are performed with the acquired data to evaluate the effectiveness. The
widely-used EKF-based state estimator is also executed and compared
with the proposed methods to evaluate the performance of different
methods. Since the precise initial SOC is unavailable practical applications, the SOC is initialized erroneously as 60% in this work, while the
true initial SOC is 87.5%.

4.2. Simulation results
Random noises with a standard deviation of 0.5 A (10% when
normalized by the range of the FUDS current) and 2 mV, as well as
drifting errors of 0.5 A and 2 mV are added to the noise-free current and
voltage measurements to simulate the scenario with heavy EMI. Note
that the voltage disturbances are much smaller because the commercial
voltage sensors of BMS can generally ensure a much higher precision
than the current measurement. The estimation results by using the
proposed framework, including the LS-MHE (Hierarchy I), TLS-MHE
(Hierarchy II), and current-free MHE (Hierarchy) are plotted in Fig. 4.
Meanwhile, the estimation results given by the widely-used EKF are also
plotted against the ones from the hierarchical framework for a
straightforward comparison. The corresponding MAEs and RMSEs of
state estimation after the algorithms converge to within ± 5% error
bound are summarized in Table 2.
As shown in Fig. 4 (a-b) and Table 2, the SOC estimates with EKF and
LS-MHE are comparable, and both of them suffer from a major error
build-up due to the addition of large measurement errors. The estimation errors of these two methods keep around 4% in the first 4000 s and
reach the maximum of 14 % at around 7000 s. The low robustness of LS
MHE (Hierarchy I) can be explained by the optimization problem
formulation in Eq. (8), which assumes a disturbance-free system input
(load current measurement). In reality however, this deviation from
such assumption virtually leads to a deteriorative performance of LSMHE. Even worse, the regional flat SOC-OCV curve within the SOC
range of 20–50% causes a quasi-unobservable condition and thus a
growing vulnerability to perturbations. As the disturbances imposed on
the current and voltage data are eventually transferred into the estimated OCV, the enlarged SOC mismatch is hence within expectation for
these two methods.
In contrast, it is shown that the estimation errors of TLS-MHE (Hierarchy II) are much lower and always kept within the ±4% error bound.
The superior performance of TLS-MHE is attributed to its full consideration of the disturbances on both current and voltage measurement, as
suggested by Eq. (9), and the “error-in-variable” optimization mechanism can well compensate for such disturbances to ensure an unbiased
estimation. Moreover, the TLS-MHE converges into the 4% error bounds
rapidly in the first tens of seconds. The observed fast convergence is
attributed to the input error penalty in objective function Eq. (9), where
the estimation is guided efficiently towards the “correct direction” with
the low-quality current measurements, but does not fully trust the
measurements. With respect to the current-free MHE (Hierarchy), its
estimate of SOC converges into the 4% error bounds gradually in nearly
1000 s and keeps tracking of the benchmarked SOC trajectory closely.
The relatively slow convergence of the current-free MHE can be
explained from two perspective. On the one hand, as the input current is
added into the decision variables, the elevated degree of freedom of the
current-free MHE make the optimization more complex. On the other
hand, the weight of the arrival cost in the objective function grows
significantly as the input error term is removed, which limits the
propagation step size of the SOC estimates at each iteration. As shown in
Table 2, the steady-state estimation deviation is even lower than the
TLS-MHE, which can be explained by the fact that the method is independent of the current measurement, so that the errors cannot be
transferred to the state estimation.
The estimation of polarization voltage, which is cross-linked with the
SOC estimation, can serve as an important support for the aforementioned discussions. As can be seen in Fig. 4 (c-d), the results are
consistent with those of SOC estimation for all the four involved
methods. Therefore, this is not expanded for discussion for the briefness.
It is worth noting that both the TLS-MHE and the current-free MHE
can achieve input current estimation, although the former needs a rough
measurement as the basis. The estimation results of the input current by
using the two methods are shown in Fig. 5, while the statistical indicators are summarized in the last columns of Table 2. It is observed
that both the estimates agree with the ground truth closely. The scrutiny
of estimation errors, as shown in Fig. 5 (b, c), reveals that the two
methods mitigate most of the noises and offset imposed on the current
measurements. By comparison, the current-free MHE gives rise to an
even more accurate steady-state estimation of the input current, even
though it absolutely eliminates the need for current sensing.
A potential limitation of the current-free MHE is the slower
convergence during the start-up stage compared to the TLS-MHE, as
supported by Fig. 4 (a-b) and Fig. 5 (c). In spite of this, the current-free
MHE outperforms the methods in other hierarchies from the viewpoint
that, it is applicable with expected performance without the need for
current sensor installation. This unique merit appeals for wider applications including some special scenarios, such as the case of current
sensor failure or the need for monitoring cells in the parallel branches of
the pack.

5. Experimental validation and discussion

5.1. Experimental details
The algorithms are evaluated experimentally using both the FUDS
and the DST condition in this section. Arbin battery testing system is
used to load the dynamic current profiles to the LIB in use. The ranges of
the current and voltage sensors inside the test bench are 10 A and 5 V,
while the measurement error limits are both within 0.05%. The acquired
high-accuracy experimental data including the load current and terminal voltage are collected at 1 Hz and used to obtain the benchmarked
SOC trajectory, which is used to evaluate the performance of different
methods. Particularly, the reference SOC trajectory is determined by
combining the accurate SOC pre-setting and CC-based calibration. The
measurements and the benchmarked SOC trajectory are shown in Fig. 6.

5.2. Validation of modelling accuracy
The modeled terminal voltages are plotted against the measured
values in Fig. 7. It is shown that the modeled terminal voltages approach
their measurements very tightly. The modeling errors have been
confined to the 50 mV error bound for both of the two validating conditions, except for a visually observable error build-up at the ending
stage of the FUDS condition. This is caused by the high nonlinearity of
LIB dynamics at the low SOC region (typically lower than 15%), which
can be hardly described by the first-order RC model employed in this
paper. Fortunately, such deep charge depletion is hardly met in practice
as a consequence of the intention to protect the battery. It is hence
validated the parameterized model is highly authentic to describe the
LIB electrical dynamics, offering a solid basis for the model-based state
and input current co-estimation.

5.3. Experimental validation with ignorable noise corruption
Measurements with high-precision sensors under well-protected
laboratory conditions are used for method validation herein. With
high-fidelity measurements, the TLS-MHE is approximately equivalent
to the LS-MHE. Hence, only the LS-MHE, current-free MHE, and the
widely-used EKF are included for comparison in this section. 
The results of the SOC estimation under FUDS and DST conditions
are illustrated in Fig. 8, and correspondingly, the statistical results of
estimation deviation (MAE and RMSE) in the steady-state are summarized in Table. 3. It is shown that the widely-used EKF and LS-MHE
(Hierarchy I) can estimate the SOC accurately. This is within expectation since the algorithms are implemented in an environment with
ignorable noise corruption. By comparison, the proposed current-free
MHE method augments the input current to the state space for coestimation, which risks declining the estimation performance due to
the elevated degrees of freedom and the incurred cross-interference
problem. This problem indeed exists, witnessed by the slow convergence at the initial stage. Once converged, however, the current-free
MHE exhibits an equivalent accuracy compared to the benchmarked
EKF and LS-MHE which utilize the high-quality input current
information.
By using the current-free MHE, the estimation results of input current
are shown in Fig. 9 (a-c, d-f) in comparison with their benchmarks
measured by the high-precision sensors. In correspondence to the
convergence of SOC estimation, it takes a transition period for the
current-free MHE method to alleviate the initialization error. After this
stage, the input current estimates track the noise-free current measurements reference closely. Despite that the maximum estimation error
that appears at the transient change of the current is nearly 0.6 A, the
average estimation error is within a reasonable range under both the
FUDS and DST conditions. This can be justified by the statistical error
information summarized in Table. 4. The estimation RMSEs are 0.151 A
and 0.197 A under the two conditions, respectively. The normalized
RMSEs are smaller than 4%, which stands for a high accuracy
considering the same level of precision of Hall-effect current sensors
which are widely used.
Two major conclusions can be drawn from the experimental results
in this section. First, under the scenario of ignorable or slight noise
corruption, the LS-MHE provides sufficient estimation performance that
similar to the EKF. There is no need to move to hierarchy II or III, which
inevitably increases the computing complexity. Second, the current-free
MHE method is capable of co-estimation of the battery input current
profile and SOC with sufficient accuracy leveraging merely the voltage
measurements.

5.4. Experimental validation with heavy disturbance
In this section, remarkable disturbances consistent with the simulation study are imposed on the current and terminal voltage measurements. The SOC estimation results of the EKF, LS-MHE, TLS-MHE,
current-free MHE methods are plotted in Fig. 10, and the statistical errors are summarized in Table. 5.
It can be observed that the SOC estimation results by using EKF and
LS-MHE methods are similar to the simulation study. Although all the
methods converge stably and track the reference closely, the accuracy
has declined compared to the case of simulation due to the existence of
modeling uncertainties. Referring to Table. 5, the SOC estimates with
EKF and LS-MHE show large errors thus are no longer recommended for
use in practice. By comparison, the TLS-MHE and current-free MHE can
remedy this deficiency. It is observed that the estimation results of these
two methods keep high accuracy within the heavy noise-corruptive
scenario. As discussed in Section 4.2, TLS-MHE attenuates the effect of
disturbances by augmenting the input error penalty into the objective
function, while the current-free MHE completely rules out the reliance
on the noise-corrupted current information. Therefore, the disturbancetolerant property of the two methods can be explained. Consistent with
the simulation results, the current-free MHE shows a higher steady-state
accuracy but a deteriorated converging performance. Both of them
(Hierarchy II and III) are applicable with sufficient precision under the
adverse but practical in-vehicle condition of heavy noise corruption. In
the case that the current measurements are not available, the currentfree MHE (Hierarchy III) can be used for high-fidelity SOC estimation. 
The current estimation results by using the current-free MHE and the
TLS-MHE are plotted comparatively in Fig. 11, and the statistical errors
are summarized in Table. 5. The reported estimation accuracies show
certain declinations compared with the foregoing given simulation results in Table 2. This is within expectation since the introduced model
uncertainty inevitably discounts the performance of the discussed
model-based estimator.
The overall performance of the current estimation is shown in Fig. 11
(a, d). Again, the convergence speed of the TLS-MHE is faster than the
current-free MHE, which is consistent with the convergence of SOC
estimation. As shown in Fig. 11 (b, e), the estimation accuracy of the
current-free MHE is slightly higher than the TLS-MHE method after
convergence, especially under the DST condition. Moreover, the estimation errors by using the two methods are both much smaller
compared with the measurement noise, as illustrated in Fig. 11 (c, f),
suggesting that the current measurement uncertainty has been mitigated
to a large extent. Referring to Table. 6, the MAEs RMSEs of the current
estimates are even smaller than the drifting error and the standard deviation of the random noises imposed on the current measurements.
Two major findings can be summarized from the experimental results in this section. First, the LS-MHE (Hierarchy I) is heavily biased and
thus not applicable in the adverse condition of heavy noise corruption.
Instead, both the TLS-MHE (Hierarchy II) and the current-free MHE
(Hierarchy III) promise disturbance-immune performance. Second, in
the even worse condition of no available current sensor, only the
current-free MHE (Hierarchy III) can promise an accurate estimation of
SOC. Moreover, the highly-authentic estimation of input current reported by current-free MHE also inspires the possibility to extend its
practical use for the design of the virtual current sensor and the real-time
current sensor fault diagnostic of the battery system.

5.5. Discussion on the practical application
Although the proposed method is designed to be implemented on a
cell-level processor toward the future application of self-regulated smart
batteries, it is also applicable to the conventional configuration of battery system. Particularly, the proposed method can be compiled into the
BMS in advance. Considering the condition where both the voltage and
current are measurable (e.g. in series branches), the Hierarchy II of the
proposed method is activated, which can give an accurate SOC estimation using the noise-corrupted measurements. Considering the condition
where the current is unmeasurable (e.g. in parallel branches or with
failed current sensors), the Hierarchy III of the proposed method is
activated, which can realize accurate co-estimation of both the SOC and
input current. In the future, this endeavor can potentially contribute to
reducing the expense of battery system by discarding the physical current sensors.
An undesirable effect is the growing computational burden when
estimating the SOC and input current of all cells simultaneously. There
can be two potential solutions to mitigate this adverse effect. First, each
battery module can be equipped with one or more slave controllers to
separate the huge computational burden into several affordable portions. Second, as depicted in BATTERY 2030 + Roadmap of Europe,
higher degree of intelligent management is expected for the future
battery system [42]. Within this vision, the system-level management
can be realized in a distributed fashion by developing the self-regulated
smart battery, which is generally devised with switches, sensors, and
build-in cell-level processor. This endeavor will be focused on in our
future work. 

6. Conclusions
This paper proposes a hierarchical framework for the accurate soft
measurement of battery SOC and load current. Within the proposed
framework, three constrained optimization problems are formulated
accounting for different degrees of current sensor uncertainties, and
three estimation methods named LS-MHE, TLS-MHE and current-free
MHE are developed by solving them in a real-time fashion. The primary conclusions are:
1. Under the scenario with accurate current measurements, the LS-MHE
(Hierarchy I) is the best candidate with high accuracy and fast
convergence. The MAEs of SOC estimation are 0.89% and 1.09%
respectively under the FUDS and DST conditions.
2. Under the scenario of heavily-corrupted current measurement, both
TLS-MHE (Hierarchy II) and current-free MHE (Hierarchy III) can
provide accurate SOC estimate. The MAEs of SOC estimation with
TLS-MHE (1.59% and 1.99%) and current-free MHE (0.87% and
1.67%) validate to be much smaller than those of LS-MHE (6.22%
and 6.97%), under the FUDS and DST conditions.
3. Under the scenario of no current measurement, only the current-free
MHE (Hierarchy III) is applicable for SOC estimation. The MAEs of
the SOC estimation are as low as 0.78% and 1.45% respectively
under FUDS and DST conditions.
4. The current-free MHE (Hierarchy III) can be used for the soft measurement of battery current. The normalized RMSEs of current estimation are smaller than 4%, which is in the same level with the
widely-used Hall-effect current sensors. This unique merit inspires
the possibility to extend its practical use for the design of virtual
current sensor and the real-time current sensor fault diagnostic.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zhongbao Wei: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original
draft, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Jian Hu: Writing – review &
editing, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Validation. Yang
Li: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Investigation. Hongwen
He: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Weihan Li: Writing – review
& editing. Dirk Uwe Sauer: Writing – review & editing. 