Title: Gridlock, Bureaucratic Control, and Nonstatutory Policymaking in Congress
Author: Alexander Bolton
Journal: American Journal of Political Science
Year: 2021

Abstract
Increasing ideological polarization and dysfunction in Congress raise questions about whether and how Congress remains capable of constraining the activities of other actors in the separation of powers system. In this article, I argue Congress uses nonstatutory policymaking tools to overcome the burdens of legislative gridlock in an increasingly polarized time to constrain executive branch actors. I leverage a new data set of committee reports issued by the House and Senate appropriations committees from fiscal years 1923 through 2019 to empirically explore these dynamics and evaluate my argument. Traditionally, these reports are a primary vehicle through which Congress directs agency policymaking in the appropriations process. Committees increasingly turn to them when passing legislation is most difficult and interbranch agency problems are most pronounced. In this way, nonstatutory mechanisms may help maintain the balance of power across branches, even when Congress faces gridlock-induced incapacity.


Separation of powers is central to American governance. Although theoretically this structure allows citizens to reap the salutary benefits of institutional actors checking the actions of others, it also embeds gridlock into the foundation of U.S. politics, which can lead to policy stasis. When legislators have fragmented preferences, this legislative incapacity will be more severe and prevent the government from passing laws to address pressing social and economic issues (see Barber and McCarty 2015, for an overview of this literature). This inability to pass legislation is particularly consequential when Congress wants to direct, check, or counter the unilateral or regulatory policies of the executive. Unless Congress can muster large supermajorities to overcome a presidential veto and overturn an administration's decision, it is seemingly inhibited from preventing and responding to executive actions that leave legislative majorities worse off relative to existing policy (Howell 2003; Krehbiel 1998). Thus, the intrabranch supermajoritarian constraints on passing legislation impair the ability of congressional majorities to influence executive policymaking, particularly in the presence of interbranch preference divergence. Together, gridlock and interbranch agency problems seemingly undermine key principles underlying separation of powers and legislative constraints on executive actions (e.g., Barber and McCarty 2015; Carmines and Fowler 2017).
Where does this leave congressional control over the bureaucracy and the executive? On its face, it suggests presidents and their wider administrations have substantial leeway to act, potentially in ways that make Congress worse off. Yet, empirical patterns of executive policymaking suggest agencies and presidents are at least somewhat responsive to congressional preferences, even in recent decades when polarization is high. For instance, presidents appear to decrease their unilateral behavior in the face of congressional opposition and agencies decrease their regulatory output during periods of divided government (Howell 2003; Potter and Shipan 2017; Yackee and Yackee 2009). Indeed, Acs (2019) demonstrates agency regulatory behavior is consistent with a model in which Congress can unilaterally veto regulations, even though legislative vetoes were proscribed by the Supreme Court in INS v. Chadha. Why would executive actors forbear in this way, however, if Congress cannot credibly act to direct or overturn these actions legislatively?
I focus on nonstatutory means Congress possesses to direct or discipline the executive branch, that is, policy instruments that influence executive policy choices but are not statutes. I explore the dynamics of nonstatutory control by focusing on the House and Senate Appropriations Committees and their use of reports accompanying their legislation to direct the activities of the executive branch. Traditionally, policy directives to agencies from appropriators appear in this form rather than in statutes. Drawing on the logic of repeated play, I argue agencies have strong incentives to be scrupulous in their adherence to them. Notably, unlike appropriations laws, these reports do not need to be approved by anyone outside the appropriations committee, which makes them a powerful way for appropriators to communicate to agencies about their policy preferences while also skirting collective action issues associated with passing legislation. Although not legally binding like statutes, they may nonetheless preserve congressional influence over executive actions in a gridlocked legislative environment by acting as parallel informal policymaking institutions alongside statutory texts (Azari and Smith 2012).
This argument provides clear predictions about when committees rely on these nonstatutory policy instruments to guide agency behavior. First, interbranch agency problems, which arise when Congress and the executive do not share policy and political goals, should impel congressional actors to pursue control over the executive branch. Second, these efforts are increasingly likely to take nonstatutory forms when Congress is highly gridlocked given that nonstatutory tools are not affected in the same way as legislation by gridlock. Importantly, I argue that the impacts of gridlock and interbranch conflict on nonstatutory policymaking are interactive. In the context of the appropriations process, reports will be longer and include more constraints when interbranch conflict and gridlock are both relatively high. When either condition is absent, the effect of the other should be diminished. If there is little gridlock, Congress is better positioned to pursue more binding means than nonstatutory ones for controlling the bureaucracy. If agency problems are minimal, then Congress has less motivation to assert control over the executive branch in the first place.
To evaluate this argument, I introduce a data set of appropriations committee reports accompanying annual funding legislation written by the House and Senate Appropriations Committees between fiscal years (FYs) 1923 and 2019. Both gridlock and interbranch agency problems vary considerably over this time period. I examine how the length of these reports and their contents respond to interbranch conflict, gridlock, and their interaction, and find strong support for the theoretical argument. The appropriations committees write substantially longer reports with more constraining provisions when the executive branch is controlled by the opposite party and when gridlock in Congress is relatively high. However, they use these tools less when either condition is absent.
These results provide insights into the dynamics of congressional control of the bureaucracy and add to a growing literature about when and why Congress uses nonstatutory means of policy influence (e.g., Lowande 2018; MacDonald and McGrath 2016; Ritchie 2018). My focus on the interactions between interbranch preference divergence and gridlock highlights the importance of factors internal to Congress and lawmaking for understanding the nature and shape of congressional constraint. Even when passing laws is difficult, Congress (or parts of it) possess strong nonstatutory mechanisms to direct administrative activity. These tools are used by congressional committees to sidestep the obstacles to exercising formal, statutory power over agencies. Thus, the existence and use of these nonstatutory mechanisms of control, although not as binding as a passing a law, can help committees overcome challenges in compelling agency responsiveness that arise both in Congress and in the executive branch.

The Politics of Nonstatutory Control
Delegation, Gridlock, and Political Control of the Bureaucracy
The complexities of modern governance require delegation from the legislative to the executive branch. Legislatures consider a variety of policies, and investing substantial resources to develop expertise in all of them is impracticable. Executive branch agencies specialize, thus incentivizing legislative delegation to them to mitigate uncertain and extreme policy outcomes (e.g., Epstein and O'Halloran 1999). However, allowing other actors to make policy choices is not necessarily costless for legislators. When executive branch actors have policymaking authority, they can make policy choices that benefit them, potentially at the expense of legislative majorities. These agency losses are of particular concern to legislators when executive actors do not share their policy preferences. How Congress mitigates these agency problems has long been a subject of scholarly interest (e.g., Lowande 2018; McCubbins, Noll, and Weingast 1987; Moe 1985; Ritchie 2018; Weingast and Moran 1983). Many mechanisms of control have been studied, including limiting statutory discretion, structuring procedures, using legislation (or more specialized tools like the Congressional Review Act (CRA) or in the past, legislative vetoes) to overturn agency decisions, or anticipation wherein agencies avoid policies that will upset Congress to avoid costs. The general verdict of the literature is that Congress is able to compel responsiveness to its preferences, at least under certain conditions (e.g., Acs 2019; Ferejohn and Shipan 1990; Shipan 2004; Weingast and Moran 1983; Yackee and Yackee 2009).
However, statute-based control mechanisms are less useful in times when there is substantial gridlock in Congress. Following Krehbiel (1998), I conceptualize gridlock as corresponding to conditions wherein ideological fragmentation and supermajoritarian lawmaking institutions act together to stymie the efforts of legislative majorities to change status quo policies. When policies are “gridlocked,” there is no possibility of changing them in a way that will simultaneously overcome a filibuster in the Senate and be signed by the president or command a majority that would override a presidential veto. The difficulty of passing legislation to reduce the discretion of an agency or overturn their policies is increasing in the gridlock of Congress, making control of the executive branch more difficult.
This is doubly true if executive branch actors strategically exploit gridlock and choose policies they know Congress cannot muster the supermajorities to overturn. In this case, administration policies will stand protected by the presidential veto, even if legislative majorities prefer the status quo ex ante. Indeed, Howell (2003) provides evidence presidents do this with respect to executive orders. Bureaucratic actors appear similarly savvy in using their procedural advantages to stymie legislative oversight (Potter 2019). Thus, gridlock exacerbates the interbranch agency problems Congress confronts.
Altogether, if these political dynamics exist, gridlock shifts power toward the executive and diminishes incentives for responsiveness to congressional preferences in public policy implementation. One may argue courts will intervene if agencies flout congressional intent. However, agencies often regulate based on vague statutes, and since Chevron, the purported posture of the federal courts is to defer to agency interpretations of their statutes. Others have pointed to appropriations statutes as a venue in which Congress can work its will legislatively by using limitation riders (e.g., MacDonald 2010). However, these are frequent subjects of presidential veto threats, and congressional actors often yield to avoid a government shutdown (Hassell and Kernell 2016). Thus, limitation riders can be effective, but they are not a panacea for congressional control.

Nonstatutory Tools of Control
The foregoing discussion suggests the combination of delegation to the executive branch, strategic executive actors, and gridlock serves to facilitate the aggrandizement of executive power. However, this account does not consider nonstatutory tools available to Congress to advance its interests. I argue the political and institutional constraints on congressional lawmaking power impel it to use nonstatutory mechanisms of executive control. Although I review the details of the specific nonstatutory tools I focus on in more detail later (i.e., appropriations committee reports) and other nonstatutory tools for influencing the executive, in general, this argument applies to any policy tool by which Congress can communicate its preferences to the bureaucracy that agencies view as credible statements of congressional preferences they should heed. These nonstatutory tools are not necessarily substitutes for legislation, but they may nonetheless advance congressional interests.1
Because nonstatutory control tools are not legally enforceable, their efficacy in bringing about responsiveness to Congress relies on exploiting other incentives that drive bureaucratic behavior. Two primary factors stand out and likely work together to produce agency compliance. First, compliance may be borne of repeated interactions between the agency and principals in Congress. Agencies are “repeat players” with their principals in Congress and may believe they stand to lose if relationships with long-lived principals become frayed. To maintain cooperation, however, agencies must believe there is a credible threat they will incur costs if they do not comply with nonstatutory mandates. Thus, the second factor necessary to produce compliance is that Congress has tools in its arsenal to unilaterally impose costs on recalcitrant agencies. These might take the form of contentious oversight hearings, document requests that burden agency staff, public denunciations of the agency that could harm its reputation, using its agenda control to ignore agency priorities that are less salient to Congress, and so on. In this way, the nonstatutory powers of Congress can work in tandem to ensure agency responsiveness.
If a nonstatutory mechanism of bureaucratic control indeed induces compliance, it offers substantial political and policy benefits for Congress. First, it does not require presidential or often even majority assent in Congress to be effected. In that way, it overcomes gridlock concerns in Congress. Second, these types of tools can also overcome the interbranch agency problems that arise in delegating authority to the executive branch if they effectively play on agency incentives.
In this article, I am interested in exploring when Congress turns to these types of nonstatutory tools to direct and oversee bureaucratic policymaking. As noted earlier, the key drawback to nonstatutory means of control is they cannot be legally enforced. Although agencies may nearly always choose to comply with statutory mandates, nonstatutory ones may not always bring about responsiveness to congressional preferences if agencies choose to disregard them because the political benefits outweigh expected future costs. My argument does not presume agencies will always comply with nonstatutory mandates to the letter (though, much of the literature reviewed below suggests they make substantial efforts to do so). However, on the margins, they may increase the probability of responsiveness and for this reason are worth investing in. For instance, if Congress could reasonably choose between nullifying a regulation it dislikes through a joint resolution pursuant to the CRA instead of using some other less binding means to urge an agency to withdraw a rule it has promulgated, then it would likely prefer the former option given that it has the force of law behind it. However, as the history of the CRA demonstrates, Congress can rarely mobilize the necessary majorities and/or presidential support for exercising options like the CRA, and instead may turn to other means of directing executive branch activity that are less susceptible to gridlock and may improve responsiveness at the margins.
The sum of this discussion suggests congressional majorities increasingly use these tools when two conditions obtain: interbranch preference divergence and gridlock. First, as interbranch conflict increases, there is a greater need for Congress to assert control over executive branch actors to compel agency responsiveness. This is because when Congress and the executive branch have divergent policy and political goals, the potential for agency losses is at its highest. Second, when gridlock is higher, directing bureaucratic policymaking through legislation is more difficult due to the supermajoritarian lawmaking requirements in the U.S. political system.
However, there are important interactions between these two key variables that shape congressional incentives. I argue that when both conditions are present, committees have the greatest incentive to employ nonstatutory mechanisms of control. When agency problems are minimal (i.e., when the preferences of Congress and the executive branch are relatively aligned), there is less incentive to expend time and resources on nonstatutory (or statutory) control. Under these conditions, agencies are less likely to be engaging in behavior that leads to outcomes that make congressional majorities worse off.2 Given this, the policy returns to exerting greater control are smaller. When agency problems are diminished, the effect of gridlock will be dampened because there is less desire to constrain the executive in the first place.
Similarly, Congress has relatively less incentive to increase its use of nonstatutory mechanisms in situations where agency problems are present but gridlock is low (conditions that obtained, for instance, during the Ford presidency). Here, Congress is better positioned to respond legislatively to adverse agency actions. Knowing this, agencies are more likely to be responsive to the preferences of Congress when making policy because they view statutory rebukes as more credible if they step out of line. In addition, if they indeed are unresponsive to congressional preferences in their policy choices, then Congress would likely prefer a statutory to a nonstatutory response, which is more binding and is also more manageable under conditions of low gridlock, all else equal.
To summarize, my argument suggests nonstatutory tools for policy direction become most attractive from the perspective of Congress when both interbranch agency and intrabranch collective action problems are present. The absence of either should lessen the reliance of congressional actors on these tools to shape the choices of executive branch actors. This suggests there is a strong and positive interactive effect of these two conditions—gridlock and interbranch division—for the production of nonstatutory policy direction by Congress.

Nonstatutory Control in Previous Work
Previous work on nonstatutory control of the bureaucracy has primarily focused on the role of oversight, such as through hearings, investigations, and back-channel communications with agencies. In seminal research, Fiorina (1977) and McCubbins and Schwartz (1984) argue members of Congress wait for interest groups to raise their hackles about agency decisions and then step in to claim credit for criticizing the agency's decision in an oversight venue. Subsequent work demonstrates how Congress uses these hearings to both manage agency problems and diminish an administration's public prestige (e.g., Kriner and Schwartz 2008; Kriner and Schickler 2014, 2016; MacDonald and McGrath 2016). Other research examines the influence of Congress's legislative vetoes to nullify executive branch actions (e.g., Fisher 2005; Korn 1996). Recent studies investigate the use of back-channel communications by members of Congress to influence bureaucratic decision making. For instance, Ritchie (2018) demonstrates that senators frequently communicate preferences privately to agencies, particularly when facing constituency cross-pressures. Lowande (2018) finds that there are no apparent ideological patterns to the use of back-channel oversight, instead arguing it is motivated by legislators' valence concerns.
Although certainly impactful, these nonstatutory tools also have features that may limit their use and efficacy, at least from the perspective of directing and constraining agencies on a continuous basis. Oversight hearings are costly for committees to undertake and are thus often ad hoc, which may diminish their utility to provide ongoing control over bureaucratic policymaking. Informal communications may serve as a weaker signal to the bureaucracy than hearings or other communications because they do not necessarily come from privileged institutional actors or represent the collective will of Congress or a politically relevant subcomponent of it (such as an oversight committee). There are conflicting results in existing work, with agency responsiveness to back-channel communications found in some contexts but not others (e.g., Mills, Kalaf-Hughes, and MacDonald 2016; Ritchie and You 2019). Legislative vetoes, which occur after agencies' decisions may be politically costly for majorities if the policies create new constituencies that support their entrenchment and may also be subject to gridlock dynamics depending on their form.
Nonstatutory Control and the Appropriations Process
I focus on an institution that allows the congressional appropriations committees to exercise constraint and overcomes some of the challenges Congress faces when using other nonstatutory tools to direct and constrain agencies on a continuing basis: the issuance of reports accompanying their legislation. Each year, the subcommittees of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees work on funding legislation in their jurisdictions to report to the broader committee and chamber. Committees simultaneously produce reports complementing the recommended statutory language.
Traditionally, the texts of appropriations laws are spare. Instead, appropriators include specific policy instructions for agencies in these accompanying reports. The reports include a variety of directives to agencies, ranging from technical issues about how funding can be allocated to substantive commentary on agency policymaking decisions that extend outside of the appropriations process per se. Common provisions include instructions for agencies to make particular policy decisions, setting priorities for the agency, reporting requirements, prior notification requirements, deadlines, earmarks, requirements to conduct studies and investigate particular policies, staffing instructions (levels for the agency, particular offices, etc.), consultation requirements, planning requirements, requirements to continue or adjust levels of certain activities, and more (Bolton and Thrower 2019; Fenno 1966; Kiewiet and McCubbins 1991; Kirst 1969; Schick 2008). The reports have also been seen as a safe haven for legislative vetoes in the wake of the INS v. Chadha decision, which declared these provisions in laws unconstitutional (Fisher 2005).
The existing literature has long noted that agencies take care to comply with committee directives for the reasons discussed above—repeated interactions between agencies and committees and the credible threat of costs for noncompliance (Bolton and Thrower 2019; Fenno 1966; Fisher 2005; Kirst 1969; Schick 2008; Tollestrup 2015). With respect to repeated interactions, agencies are required to come to Congress annually in the appropriations process. Members of the appropriations committees tend to be long-serving, and subcommittee chairs often return to the helm even after their party has been out of power. Although the appointed leadership of agencies tends to be shorter lived, other work notes the importance of longer lived staff-level relationships between the appropriations committees and mezzo-level agency leadership that may also help to induce cooperation (e.g., Aberbach 1990; Ginieczki 2010; Schick 2008). Even exiting appointees may comply with congressional mandates if they value how the agency fares going forward or relationships with Congress in their postgovernment careers.3
The appropriations committees also have all of the tools discussed above (e.g., costly oversight, onerous document requests, agenda control, ability to limit discretion) at their disposal to impose costs on noncompliant agencies as needed, which helps to sustain cooperation. Indeed, the committees remind agencies of this fact. In its FY 2015 report (H. Rpt. 113-468), the House Agriculture appropriations subcommittee admonished the Food and Nutrition Service about the importance of complying with deadlines imposed by the committee: “The directives and issues that are specified in the House, Senate, or conference report are very important to the Committee and the dates specified are mandatory …FNS is reminded that the Committee reserves the right to call before it any agency that does not submit reports on time.” Thus, employing (or threatening to employ) other nonstatutory tools, like oversight hearings, that impose costs on agencies increases the likelihood of agency compliance.
Although systematic evidence of report influence on policy outcomes is difficult to gather given the diversity of topics and organizations covered in the reports, in-depth qualitative case studies of committee–agency interactions provide strong evidence that they are influential on agency behavior (Ginieczki 2010; Kirst 1969). Indeed, Schick (2008) describes agencies' conscientious efforts to please appropriators even when their directives seem to conflict: “Agencies are expected to follow the guidance of all reports …For example, if the House report earmarks a portion of the funds in an account to project A, the Senate report earmarks to project B, and the conference report to project C, the agency is expected to allocate the specified funds to each of the projects. The same rule applies to other types of guidance in appropriations reports.”4 Furthermore, organizations that lobby in the appropriations process often see influencing report language as an important goal, which is suggestive of the power of reports to affect outcomes. For example, in one organization's appropriations lobbying strategy for FY 2020, 21 of the 24 objectives were focused on influencing report language.5
Though reports are approved by the full appropriations committee, they are primarily written by the staffs of the relevant subcommittees under the direction of their chairs, who are often referred to as “cardinals” because of the authority they wield (Berry and Fowler 2016; Fenno 1966). To understand the types of policy content included in the reports, consider this example from the FY 2017 Senate Interior and Environment report commenting on a Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) proposed rulemaking:6

No provision in the statutory text this report accompanied mentioned the EPA's rulemaking. Further, the directive was not sanctioned by the Senate as a whole. Rather, the committee acted unilaterally to instruct the EPA. Ultimately, a new rule was proposed at the end of the Obama administration, though it was never finalized, and the Part 192 rulemaking remains as yet unresolved. This example demonstrates how these nonstatutory tools are used to communicate with agencies about their current and future policymaking activities.
The committee had other options. First, it might have included a rider in legislation prohibiting the agency from using funds to finalize the rulemaking. However, this approach could fail if the president or other legislators supported the rule. Second, the committee might have held hearings to indicate displeasure. However, relative to a few sentences in a report, the costs Congress imposes on itself (in terms of both committee and member resources and the opportunity costs associated with the hearing) make this option relatively unattractive as an initial attempt to influence policy. Finally, Congress could have waited until the regulation was finalized to overturn it using the CRA. However, this approach would necessitate presidential approval, and no president has signed a CRA resolution targeting a regulation from their own administration. Furthermore, once the regulation is promulgated, new constituencies benefiting from it may work against nullification efforts, raising the political costs of action.
As this discussion illustrates, the use of appropriations reports to instruct agencies can help Congress overcome both collective action problems and interbranch agency problems. Because they do not require a full chamber vote or presidential signature, they can bypass the gridlock dynamics endemic in the legislative process. Further, because agencies have strong incentives to comply, reports can mitigate interbranch agency problems. Thus, I would predict as both gridlock and interbranch agency problems increase, committees resort more often to incorporating instructions to agencies in these nonstatutory control mechanisms.

Data and Research Design
To evaluate my argument, I collected a new data set of appropriations committee reports that accompanied legislation from the House and Senate appropriations committees for FY 1923 through FY 2019. This encompasses observations from 49 congresses and 98 congress–chamber pairs. The unit of analysis is the report-chamber-year. Thus, for instance, the subcommittee report accompanying the House Agriculture bill for a particular FY constitutes a single observation and the report from the analogous Senate committee from that year constitutes a separate observation.8 I begin with FY 1923 (reports issued in calendar year 1922) because this is the first FY under the process of the Budget and Accounting Act of 1921 (BAA), which sets out general procedures for executive budgeting and congressional appropriations still in place today. The reports were obtained as PDFs from the Congressional Research Service (CRS) and Congressional Proquest. CRS catalogs appropriations reports from FY 1999 through the present.9 To identify earlier reports, I compiled a list of appropriations legislation from the Statutes at Large and collected the House and Senate committee reports associated with those public law numbers through Congressional Proquest.10
From the reports, I construct two dependent variables to measure the extent of nonstatutory policymaking they contain. The first is the report length in words (Report Length). This measure assumes length corresponds to a greater degree of policy direction and agency constraint. When constructing this variable, I omitted end matter that does not contain policy information (e.g., chamber-specific reporting requirements, minority views, alternative views, separate views, voting records when present, budget authority comparison tables).11 To obtain word counts from the PDF documents, I used Thomas Leeper's pdfcount software.12 The number of words per report is highly variable, with a mean of 29,484, a median of 20,312, and a standard deviation of 28,265. The distribution of word counts is right-skewed and the residuals are skewed when modeling raw word counts, so in the analyses, I model the natural logarithm of the word count.
This length-based measure has advantages and disadvantages. It captures the variety of policy directives and constraints the reports can include; however, it is also overinclusive and counts language that is boilerplate or unrelated to the core conceptual ideas of interest. A second concern is the conditions I expect to produce greater policy direction and constraint (i.e., gridlock and interbranch division) also make legislation more difficult to pass, and longer reports may reflect log-rolling and universalism rather than conflict-based attempts to constrain executive policymaking. I address these concerns in three ways. First, to examine the possibility of universalism, in Table A10 (SI p. 16), I examine whether the conditions I expect to produce constraint also produce more consensus in committee votes in the limited set of reports containing vote breakdowns. I do not find evidence of this. Second, I conducted content analysis to determine whether length is significantly associated with the volume of specific constraints on bureaucratic policymaking to buttress the Report Length variable's content validity. Third, I use this content analysis to construct an alternative dependent variable that is more directly linked to specific bureaucratic constraints than the length-based measure.
In particular, I coded three commonly recognized policymaking directives and constraints in the bureaucratic politics literature.13 First, I identified reporting requirements, where the committee mandated agencies investigate and report on specific information, policy alternatives or actions. Second, I coded for deadlines imposed by the committee for specific actions. Finally, I coded provisions mandating the agency provide prior notification to the committee before taking a particular action (which are typically associated with legislative vetoes). The average report in my data set contained 15.4 reporting requirements (maximum = 129), 13.6 deadlines (maximum = 173), and 2.8 prior notification requirements (maximum = 35).
The three leftmost panels of Figure 1 display the relationships between the volume of each constraint and report length. All three have fairly high correlations with report length (reported on plots). The three constraint types are also highly interrelated (Cronbach's α = 0.94). As such, I created a separate variable, Constraint Index, which is an estimated factor score resulting from a factor analysis of the incidence of the three constraints. This variable is also highly correlated with overall report length, as can be seen in the final panel of Figure 1. I use this scale as an alternative dependent variable in my analyses.14 The advantages and disadvantages of this variable are the reverse of Report Length: It has specific substantive referents rooted in concepts I am interested in, however, it is underinclusive and neglects other kinds of policy constraint and directives included in report language. To the extent both the Report Length and Constraint Index measures produce consistent results, it alleviates concerns measurement error in either is unduly driving conclusions.
Empirically evaluating the theoretical argument requires two key independent variables: interbranch agency problems and gridlock. Their interaction is the central test of the argument.
I characterize interbranch agency problems resulting from policy and political disagreements between Congress and the executive branch in three ways. First, I rely primarily on a partisan-based measure, Interbranch Division, which takes the value “0” when the presidency and chamber majority are controlled by the same party and “1” otherwise. This variable can take different values for the House and Senate in the same year if they are controlled by different parties. I alternatively use the absolute distance between the DW-NOMINATE Common Space scores of the subcommittee chair producing the report and the president (Chair-President Distance). Finally, I also use the distance between the president and the full appropriations committee median, because the full committee ultimately approves the report and bill (Comm.-Pres. Dist.). I do not use the two distance measures as the primary measure because presidential DW-NOMINATE scores (especially prior to World War II) are often based on very little data, and in some cases (such as for President Hoover) are not even estimated.
To measure gridlock (denoted Gridlock, below), I rely on DW-NOMINATE scores to calculate equilibrium gridlock intervals for each Congress based on Krehbiel (1998). These correspond to the absolute distance between the ideal points of the filibuster pivot in the Senate (i.e., the 40th percentile senator [or 33rd, depending on the year] ideologically from the opposite end of the ideological spectrum as the president) and either the most extreme veto pivot in the House or the Senate (i.e., the 33rd percentile senator or representative from the president's end of the ideological spectrum) or the president's ideal point if it is more moderate than either of the veto override pivots.15 This variable captures the difficulty Congress faces in passing legislation to address interbranch agency problems.
In some models, I also include controls that may confound the relationships between my key independent variables and their interaction and the length of reports. First, I include fixed effects for subcommittee–chair pairs. These control for time-invariant features of subcommittees and the individuals with the most power over report contents. The subcommittee portion controls, for instance, for the subcommittee's policy jurisdiction or norms within the subcommittee about report structures and features. The chair portion controls for individual characteristics that might dispose them toward writing shorter or longer reports.16
I also account for time trends in two ways, including a global time trend or committee-chair–specific time trends depending on the specification. This accounts for secular changes over time in the length of reports and the independent variables (particularly gridlock) that might confound the results. The committee-chair–specific trends offer a more flexible way of accounting for these same time trends if they vary within units.17
Some models include other controls. First, I account for the logged millions of dollars of budget authority contained in the bill (Bill Amount). All dollar amounts are inflation-adjusted to 2012 dollars.18 I also control for situations when a committee is evenly divided between the Republicans and Democrats (Even Partisanship). This happens in few instances (primarily in the pre–World War II era), however, it has implications for understanding whether an interbranch agency problem exists between the committee and executive branch.19 I also control for years in which the House and Senate are controlled by different parties because this might be related to gridlock and report length if committees try to counteract the instructions of one another (Divided Chambers).
Next, I control for two time-related factors. First, I include an indicator for FYs in which the earmark ban is in place, because those provisions typically appeared in the text of reports (Earmark Ban).20 Second, I include an indicator for the final Congress that a subcommittee chair is in office because this is correlated with time and may impact policymaking effort (Last Congress).
Finally, the full models also include variables capturing the resources available to the subcommittees. Writing reports takes substantial staff effort, and these variables are meant to control for the general levels of resources available to committees given there is little detailed resource information for the appropriations committees over this whole time period. The first is an indicator for years in which the reports are written after the passage of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 (Post-LRA), which endowed the appropriations committee with substantially greater staff resources than it had before.21 Second, I include an indicator variable for reports written after Republicans took control of the House and Senate in the 1994 midterm elections (Post-Gingrich). A key component of the Contract With America was to cut committee staff by one-third, which significantly affected resources (Bolton and Thrower 2016).
All the models reported in this article are ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions. In the main text, I report robust standard errors clustered at the level of Congress-chamber pair. This is the level at which Interbranch Division varies. The Gridlock variable varies by 2-year Congress, however, so in Tables A1 and A2 (SI pp. 7–8), I pursue additional clustering options including at this and other plausible levels. The statistical significance of the results is not materially affected by clustering at different levels.

Results
I now turn to the results of these analyses, displayed in Table 1. Across different specifications, I find support for the hypothesized interactive effects. Models 1–4 examine the Report Length variable, whereas Model 5 examines the alternative Constraint Index variable. Model 1 is the simplest, including only Ideological Division, Gridlock, and the fixed effects. I do not find any consistent, significant effects; however, this is not unexpected—my theoretical framework predicts a strong interactive effect between the two variables. Indeed, turning to Model 2, I find some evidence for the expected interaction without controls.22 In Model 3, I add the previously discussed control variables, including a global time trend, and the results are maintained.

Models 4 and 5 present the full specifications for both dependent variables, accounting for time even more flexibly by including chair and committee-specific time trends. In both cases, the estimated coefficients line up with theoretical expectations, with little difference across the dependent variables.
The substantive effects of interactions and their constituent terms are difficult to interpret on their own, particularly when one variable is continuous over a limited range. Therefore, I plot the estimated marginal effects of Interbranch Division and Gridlock on the Constraint Index at different levels of the other in Figure 2 based on the estimates from Model 5.
The left panel displays the estimated marginal effect of Interbranch Division as gridlock varies. Here, we see the predicted positive relationship. When gridlock is low, I estimate an insignificant relationship between Interbranch Division and the Constraint Index. However, at higher levels of gridlock, the estimated marginal effect of Interbranch Division is positive and statistically significant. To make the effect sizes more concrete, consider the conditions of the 112th Congress (2011–12), one in which gridlock was high but the House and the Senate were controlled by different parties. The results of the model suggest reports from the chamber opposed to the president (in that case, the House) would score 0.37 standard deviations higher on the Constraint Index than the Senate's reports. In Table A13 (SI p. 23), I estimate the same models using each component of the Constraint Index separately and find the estimated impact of Interbranch Division at this level of gridlock is a 124% increase in reporting requirements, a 60% increase in deadlines, and a 14% increase in notification requirements. Finally, the results from Model 4 indicate a predicted 23% increase in total report length under the same conditions.
In the right panel of Figure 2, I plot the estimated marginal effect of a one-unit change in Gridlock under conditions when partisan division is absent and present. When chamber majorities and presidents are copartisans, the estimated effect of gridlock is not statistically distinguishable from zero. However, as agency problems increase (i.e., when the chamber majority and president are not copartisans), the effect of Gridlock is positive and statistically significant. For concreteness, consider an increase in gridlock of 0.094, which represents the difference between the DW-NOMINATE scores of Senators Ben Nelson (D-NE) and Olympia Snowe (R-ME), who were the filibuster pivots in the 111th Congress before and after, respectively, Sen. Scott Brown (R-MA) was elected to fill the late Sen. Ted Kennedy's (D-MA) seat. Such an increase in Gridlock would be associated with an approximately 0.10 standard deviation increase in Constraint Index, or (based on the estimates in SI Table A13, p. 23) an increase of 23% for reporting requirements, 16% for deadlines, and 4% for notification requirements under conditions of partisan division. Inter-Congress swings can have even larger effects. For example, shifting from the gridlock levels of the 111th to the 112th Congress is associated with a 0.38 standard deviation increase in the Constraint Index, or increases of 111%, 73%, and 17% in reporting requirements, deadlines, and notifications, respectively when agency problems are relatively high.
In Models 1 and 2 of Table 2, I use DW-NOMINATE Common Space scores to calculate the absolute ideological distance between the subcommittee chair and the president as an alternative to the party-based Interbranch Division measure. I find the results are little changed using this alternative measure. Similarly, in Models 3 and 4, I model the distance between the overall appropriations committee median and the president as a measure of interbranch conflict. The results are substantively identical to those in Models 1 and 2, which is unsurprising given the chair and committee median are always copartisans (and thus have relatively similar ideal points).
Robustness: Nonstatutory Policymaking and Intraparty Conflict
The preceding results suggest the political dynamics of gridlock and lawmaking play an important role in structuring the use of nonstatutory tools in the appropriations process. However, it is possible the results may be driven by ideological fragmentation within the majority party rather than gridlock (especially if they are correlated). Prior research on the appropriations process has often focused on how intraparty political dynamics within a chamber structure outcomes. If this is a primary locus of political conflict for appropriators, then system-level gridlock may be only a small part of the politics of nonstatutory policy direction in the appropriations process. I focus on this possibility here.
Previous work on the appropriations process examines whether appropriators use their influence to subvert the political and policy goals of the broader chamber majority. The existing literature provides conflicting accounts. Kiewiet and McCubbins (1991) present results suggesting parties can successfully manage principal–agent problems that arise between the appropriations committees and the broader majority caucus. Other studies (e.g., Hanson 2014) suggest the weakness of parties over time has led to a shift from the autonomy of the appropriations committees toward more concentrated power within party leadership. However, both classic research (e.g., Fenno 1966) and recent work by Woon and Anderson (2012) emphasize the autonomy of the appropriations committees and their ability to gain favorable outcomes due to the chamber's deference to their expertise or agenda-setting power.
Indeed, appropriations reports have been cited as a way appropriators can undermine the will of other committees and the broader chamber going back to Kirst (1969). Reports do not have to be voted on by the full chamber, yet they nonetheless have apparent influence over agency behavior. If appropriators disagree substantively with the broader majority in the chamber, they may opt to include policy instructions in reports rather than in legislation given the former are not subject to review by the broader chamber. Indeed, work on the appropriations process often stresses conflicts between the committee and other powerful actors, such as the authorizing committees overseeing the same programs (Hall 2004). Facing these types of conflicts, appropriators may be tempted to exercise their nonstatutory tools to gain an advantage over other institutional actors in directing the executive branch.
To assess the degree of committee autonomy detectable in the use of appropriations reports, Table 3 replicates the analysis in Table 1. However, instead of Gridlock, I construct a measure of ideological divergence between the subcommittee chair responsible for the report and the broader majority party caucus, Chair-Party Dist. This measure is simply the absolute distance between the DW-NOMINATE Common Space scores of the subcommittee chair and the majority party median.23 If appropriators use reports to subvert the goals of the chamber majority, the interaction coefficient for Interbranch Division and Chair-Party Dist. will be positive and significant, suggesting committees turn to them more when their preferences diverge from the broader majority party and the executive branch. If the interaction coefficient is null, however, this would be more consistent with a lack of autonomy.
The results in Table 3 provide no clear support for the appropriations committee autonomy theory. Across the five specifications nearly all the estimated coefficients for both interacted and uninteracted effects of Chair-Party Dist. are statistically insignificant. The appropriations committees do not appear to use nonstatutory tools to overcome political and ideological disagreements within their own parties.24 Such seeming restraint may stem from the desire of the committee to avoid sanction from the party caucus for using its power to make the majority of the majority party worse off (e.g., Cox and McCubbins 2005). Whatever the mechanism, it appears parties effectively manage agency problems that may arise between them and the committee. These results combined with those presented earlier, suggest the use of reports in the appropriations process is a function of broader ideological fragmentation within Congress and its relationship to lawmaking. When passing statutes is difficult, Congress turns instead to its nonstatutory control mechanisms to minimize the effects of interbranch agency problems and impel agency responsiveness to congressional preferences.

Discussion and Conclusion
Whether the preferences of legislatures and other political actors are represented in the policy decisions made by bureaucracies is a central question for the accountability of the administrative state. The balance of the literature rejects the idea that Congress abdicates when delegating, and a large literature delineates the mechanisms Congress and its committees use to engage in continuing control over the executive branch. However, policy gridlock can undermine congressional control. As the goals of legislative actors diverge, mustering the support and votes to constrain executive branch actors becomes more challenging. Under these circumstances, agencies can seemingly pursue policies that benefit them (and potentially not legislative majorities) that cannot be overturned legislatively due to gridlock. As Barber and McCarty (2015, p. 44) write, “Perhaps one of the most important long-term consequences of the decline in legislative capacity caused by polarization is that Congress's power is declining relative to the other branches of government.”
I argue Congress is not altogether helpless in the face of increasing gridlock and can cope (at least in part) by using nonstatutory means to direct agencies. Although most previous work in this area focuses on how oversight hearings can be used to impose costs on agencies and communicate congressional displeasure, I explore a less visible, yet regularly used, means of congressional direction—reports issued by the appropriations committees that provide instructions to agencies about issues related to spending and other policy decisions the agency has made or is in the process of making. These reports help committees overcome the issues associated with gridlock in the face of agency losses from bureaucratic implementation of policies. Because they do not need to be ratified by any of the agency's other principals, committees can more easily overcome the collective action problems that would otherwise be attendant if they sought to control agencies through legislation. In this way, the reports help committees to solve both their interbranch principal–agent and intrabranch gridlock problems.
This argument yields predictions about when specifically committees will use nonstatutory mechanisms of control to constrain and direct executive policymaking. When both interbranch conflict and gridlock obtain, committees will find these tools to be an effective way to overcome both interbranch and intrabranch obstacles to directing agencies through legislation. However, when either condition is absent, committees turn less often to nonstatutory means of control. Using a new data set of appropriations committee reports issued since 1922, I find strong support for these hypotheses.
One may question whether the unique features of appropriations committee reports limit the generalizability of the conclusions reached here. However, this shift in focus from statutory to nonstatutory forms of policy direction and oversight is consonant with other recent developments in the separation of powers literature. Both Acs (2019) and Chiou and Rothenberg (2017) conjecture nonstatutory tools are central to congressional constraint of executive power they observe in the contexts of regulation and unilateral action. Barber, Bolton, and Thrower (2019) provide evidence of the role legislative vetoes play in constraining gubernatorial unilateralism. There is also suggestive evidence from other studies that patterns in the use of other nonstatutory tools may reflect similar political dynamics to those I highlight here. For example, Kriner and Schickler (2016) find the effect of divided government on the production of executive branch investigations in Congress is increasing in partisan polarization. Though they undertake this analysis to test their argument that the effect of divided government depends on the partisan stakes (which they proxy for with polarization), the result is also clearly consistent with my broader argument about the roles that legislative dysfunction and interbranch conflict play in producing nonstatutory policymaking. More generally, this work complements conceptual and theoretical developments that place renewed emphasis on informal policymaking institutions in advanced democracies (e.g., Azari and Smith 2012).
Overall, this article provides new insights into how Congress overcomes often-debilitating gridlock to still maintain some control over the activities of the executive branch. Although nonstatutory forms of political control lack the binding force of law, they may nonetheless serve to communicate the preferences of relevant congressional overseers when passing laws is impracticable. In this way, Congress may still continue to govern in an age when governance is seemingly more complex and difficult than ever.
