<heading>
Title: Entertainment Video Games for Academic Learning: A Systematic Review
Author: Léa Martinez, Manuel Gimenes, and Eric Lambert
Journal: Journal of English for Academic Purposes
Year: 2022
</heading>

Abstract
Entertainment video games are very popular among young audiences. Nevertheless,
despite their potential to improve cognitive functioning, they are still studied rarely as a
tool for digital game-based learning. To better understand video gaming practices’ value
in the classroom, this article provides a systematic review of literature on the effect of
entertainment video games on academic learning. Our literature search yielded 49
relevant intervention studies published between 2005 and 2019 that integrated entertainment video games into academic curricula from preschool to college. Our
review revealed that entertainment video games can be an effective educational tool
and are beneﬁcial in almost all academic disciplines, particularly in foreign language and
science. However, research on entertainment video gaming’s effects on academic
learning is still not extensive enough and remains mostly qualitative. Future studies
need to provide a quantitative approach to complete and conﬁrm already-existing
literature, particularly in the environmental and social sciences, physical education, and
programming. Given entertainment video games’ popularity and beneﬁts on cognition
and learning, it seems essential to investigate their practical value further in the education sector and to determine the mechanisms that mediate their effects on academic
learning.

Introduction
Today’s learners are digital natives who require new teaching styles to foster their
motivation and engagement in academic learning (Kiryakova et al., 2014). A recent
challenge is the implementation of alternative, modern teaching methods in education
curricula that are adapted to our cultural context. Digital game-based learning (DGBL)
is one of these methods. Its main purpose is to increase students’ interest and ensure
their motivation to learn using digital media (Prensky, 2003). Indeed, students’ positive
attitude toward video games is viewed as a great opportunity to develop a stimulating
and effective learning context (for a review, see Coleman & Money, 2020). However,
not all types of video games have been studied to the same extent. Currently, DGBL
mainly has been restricted to willingness to design appropriate educational video
games, and most studies have focused on serious, non-entertainment video games that
include pedagogical content during game play (for a review, see Zhonggen, 2019).
Compared with conventional methods, serious games improve declarative knowledge,
procedural knowledge, and knowledge retention (see Riopel et al., 2019, for a metaanalysis). Their use in classrooms enhances students’ learning in many academic
disciplines (Backlund & Hendrix, 2013). However, some studies have recommended
using non-educational, entertainment video games—whose main goal is players’
enjoyment—in academic learning methods, deeming them just as effective as serious
games (Breuer & Bente, 2010; Charsky & Mims, 2008).
This interest in entertainment video games in the DGBL literature highlights the
need to examine and discuss the value of non-serious video games in academic learning
(i.e., for the acquisition of knowledge and skills at school). As far as we know, no
systematic review has been conducted on entertainment video games’ value as pedagogical support. For ease of reading, considering that no agreement exists on a term for
non-educational games (commercial video games, Commercial-Off-The-Shelf video
games, entertainment video games have been used, among others), we decided to use
the term entertainment video games in this article.

From Serious Video Games to Entertainment Video Games in
Academic Learning
For several years, serious video games have been studied extensively in various research ﬁelds. Contrary to entertainment video games, they play an increasingly important role in academic learning. Serious games can be deﬁned as any digital games in
which their pedagogical purpose is embedded in the game scenario (Klopfer et al.,
2009). A wide variety of serious games (e.g., Darfur is dying, Ruiz, 2006; Dragonbox,
Siew et al., 2016; see Zhonggen, 2019, for a meta-analysis) has been mostly developed
and used in educational and learning contexts, offering a beneﬁcial alternative to
conventional instructional methods, as they correspond to a more active method that
enables students to engage in higher-level cognitive tasks (Riopel et al., 2019). Playing
serious games integrated into a school curriculum enhances academic learning in many
Martinez et al.
disciplines (mathematics, history, English, etc.). Meta-analyses have found small to
moderate positive effects of serious games on reading (Cheung & Slavin, 2012),
vocabulary (Thompson & von Gillern, 2020), and natural sciences (Riopel et al., 2019).
Moreover, students learn more through serious video games if they receive additional
teaching materials. External supports such as additional instructions, exercises, and
feedback are moderators of serious games’ effects on academic learning (Sitzmann,
2011; Wouters et al., 2013). Thus, serious video games have become a common tool in
educational settings, particularly for academic learning.
One issue in game and learning studies, particularly in the academic domain, is the
lack of interest in all kinds of video games. A clear-cut distinction exists between
serious and entertainment video games. Serious games designed for academic learning
have been studied widely over the past decade, but they do not correspond to
mainstream video games and are not commercialized, or they are commercialized to a
limited audience. However, entertainment video games are very popular, mainly among
young audiences. They aim to entertain the players and have no direct pedagogical
purpose. For a long time, entertainment video games have suffered from their bad
reputation regarding child education. Many studies have highlighted violent entertainment video games’ negative impact on behavior or affect (Anderson & Bushman,
2001; Medeiros et al., 2020). However, many other studies have focused on the overall
beneﬁts of playing entertainment video games on cognitive functions (for a review, see
Choi et al., 2020). According to recent literature, the positive impact from playing
entertainment video games on cognitive functions, particularly executive functions
(McCord et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020), has been largely demonstrated (for a review,
see Choi et al., 2020). Executive functions are a set of mental processes necessary to
control behavior in new and adapting situations (Diamond, 2013; Elliott, 2003).
Compared with non-video gamers, entertainment video gamers demonstrate better
attention, working memory, visuospatial, decision-making, and problem-solving
abilities (Bediou et al., 2018; Buelow et al., 2015; Ruiz-Marquez et al., 2019). Furthermore, entertainment video game training programs has been found to improve
attention, visuospatial (Oei & Patterson, 2013), working memory (Blacker et al., 2014),
and problem-solving (Shute et al., 2015) abilities. For example, playing Call of Duty for
28 hours signiﬁcantly increased visual working-memory performance (Blacker et al.,
2014). It seems that any entertainment video game genre (e.g., traditional video games,
simulation video games, strategy video games, action video games, fantasy video
games) has the potential to enhance cognitive functions (Choi et al., 2020), but action
video games in particular were found to improve attention and spatial cognition
(Bediou et al., 2018). Therefore, entertainment video games were found to enhance
several cognitive and executive functions.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that cognitive and executive functions are
related, positively and strongly, to academic learning. For example, cognitive abilities
such as executive functions, reasoning, and working memory are predictors of reading
and mathematics skills (Peng & Kievit, 2020). Working memory training based on 20
training sessions with working memory tasks enhanced children’s academic achievement

in reading and mathematics (Studer-Luethi et al., 2016). Therefore, it is relevant to
consider whether entertainment video gaming also could improve academic skills
through enhancement of cognitive functions. Some studies have already found a positive
correlation between entertainment video game practice and academic learning. Compared with non-video gamers, entertainment video gamers demonstrate better results in
English foreign language (Pitarch, 2018; Sundqvist, 2019), reading, and mathematics
(Bowers & Berland, 2013). Therefore, we believe that it is essential to establish an
overview of the use of entertainment video gaming for academic learning to determine
whether it could be an effective alternative learning method in educational settings, and to
highlight its strengths and limitations. To do so, a systematic review was conducted to
address the central questions of how entertainment video games inﬂuence academic
learning, how such video games’ effects are assessed in the education sector, and what
recommendations can be made for future research. In this review, we focused on intervention studies in school settings so that we could determine the effect of entertainment
video gaming on academic learning. Thus, intervention studies using entertainment video
games that were integrated into a school curriculum (from preschool to college) were
reviewed and classiﬁed according to the academic learning domain that they assessed.
This literature review is of both scientiﬁc and pedagogical interest because it
provides insights for both the research and education ﬁelds. Currently, to our
knowledge, no integrative review on entertainment video games and academic learning
exists. DGBL literature reviews mainly focused on the use and effect of serious games
in education (Coleman & Money, 2020; Riopel, 2019; Zhonggen, 2019) while entertainment video games literature reviews reported effects on cognitive functions and
did not directly focus on education (Choi et al., 2020). Therefore, this article provides
an overview of the recent literature on an original topic, along with scientiﬁc insights on
entertainment video games’ effects on academic learning and pedagogical insights on
the implementation of this kind of video game in classrooms.

Method
The article selection method was based on recent best practice guidelines describing the
state of the art of conducting literature reviews (Siddaway et al., 2019).

Literature Search
The literature search was conducted through PsycINFO (APA science and psychology
database), Web of Science (multiple science databases), and ERIC (education research
database). Peer-reviewed journal articles written in English and published between
2005 (which corresponds to the release of Nintendo DS and Xbox 360 game systems)
and 2019 were searched. The search request was ([“video game” OR “computer game”]
AND [“academic learning” OR “learning” OR “classroom” OR “school” OR “education”] -[“serious game” OR “game-based learning” OR “game-based instruction” OR
“computer-assisted instruction”]). We excluded search terms that could lead to studies
Martinez et al.

about educational games that are not within our search scope. The search yielded 3677
articles. Based on their titles, 452 articles were identiﬁed as potentially relevant and
were screened for inclusion.

Inclusion Criteria
Studies were included if they used entertainment video games in pedagogical contexts,
and assessed participants’ academic learning and related skills. Altogether, 40 articles
met the inclusion criteria and were selected. Nine additional articles that met the criteria
were found through other sources, bringing the total to 49 articles selected for this
review. An overview of the search and inclusion process is provided in Figure 1.

Summary of Included Studies
For each selected article, the academic learning domain, video game used, type of
statistical analyses, and main results were noted. To conduct a detailed analysis, the
articles then were grouped according to the academic learning assessed. This review
includes academic learning from preschool to university level.

Results
An overview of selected articles’ distribution by academic disciplines and by school
grade levels is provided in Figure 2. We found that most studies focused on college
students (40.8%) and high school students (36.7%). Moreover, from preschool to
middle school, the most studied academic ﬁeld is science (50%). However, the most
studied disciplines with older students are history (33.3% in high school) and foreign
language (50% in college).
For a detailed analysis, the results of the selected articles were organized by academic domains to assess the effect of video game use on each domain (Table 1). The
discipline, the school grade level, the employed video game and its category, the
number of participants, and the type of analyses are speciﬁed for each selected article.

Literature
The largest body of research in this review demonstrated the beneﬁts from using video
games for foreign language learning, with most studies indicating signiﬁcant improvements in students’ foreign language vocabulary through the use of video games.
One qualitative study found that playing Scribblenauts and Age of Empires II increased
English vocabulary acquisition among Colombian college students (Camacho Vásquez
& Ovalle, 2019). Furthermore, deHaan (2005) also observed that playing a Japanese
baseball video game improved a U.S. student’s Japanese oral and written comprehension skills. The student identiﬁed several learning supports from the game, including repetition of actions and sentences; contextual clues, such as expected baseball

Journal of Educational Computing Research 0(0)

Figure 1. Overview of the selection process.


Figure 2. Selected articles’ distribution by disciplines and by school grade levels.

movements; and simultaneous presentation of oral and written language. Newgarden
and Zheng (2016) also analyzed interactions between students from various nations
playing World of Warcraft and noticed that the game could improve English learning
because students’ communicative activities sometimes corresponded with advanced
English proﬁciency levels. These ﬁrst three studies used a qualitative method to assess

Figure 2. Continued.

foreign language learning, without any control group nor inferential statistical analyses.
Five studies compared the use of video games with traditional learning methods for
vocabulary acquisition. The ﬁrst study detected improvement in English learning
attitudes and achievement among Taiwanese students who played Pokemon Go (Wu,
2019). Iranian students who played the adventure game Runaway: A Road Adventure
outperformed students who took a traditional class on English vocabulary learning
(Vahdat & Rasti Behbahani, 2013). Ebrahimzadeh (2017) also demonstrated that,
compared with an intensive reading method, Iranian students who played Warcraft and
those who only watched the game gained signiﬁcantly in English vocabulary levels.
Interestingly, comparisons between players and watchers of video games yielded mixed
results. With Warcraft, Ebrahimzadeh and Alavi (2016) and Ebrahimzadeh (2017)
found no differences between players and watchers on vocabulary acquisition, but
deHaan et al. (2010) found that Japanese students who played a rhythm game were
outperformed by those who only watched the game. One reason may involve game
Literature
Academic
ﬁeld

Foreign
language

Discipline

Table 1. Selected Articles.

Vahdat and Rasti
Behbahani
(2013)
Ebrahimzadeh
(2017)
Ebrahimzadeh
and Alavi
(2016)
deHaan et al.
(2010)
Miller and
Hegelheimer
(2006)
Chen and Yang
(2013)
Ranalli (2008)
Janebi Enayat
and
Haghighatpasand
(2019)

Newgarden and
Zheng (2016)
Wu (2019)

Camacho Vásquez
and Ovalle
(2019)
deHaan (2005)

Articles

80
18

Warcraft III: The Frozen Throne (real time
strategy game)
Warcraft III: The Frozen Throne (real time
strategy game)
Parappa the Rapper 2 (rhythm game)
The Sims (life simulation game)

Bone (adventure game)
The Sims (life simulation game)
The Secret of Monkey Island (adventure
game)

College,
undergraduates
College, unknown

College, undergraduates
College, unknown
College,
undergraduates

High school, unknown

9
30

22

136

241

40

61

5

1

High school, unknown

College, undergraduates

College, unknown

College, undergraduates

College, unknown

(continued)

Quantitative
Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Qualitative

Qualitative

Qualitative

15

Scribblenauts (puzzle-action game) and
Age of Empires II (real-time
strategy game)
Jiikyoo Pawaﬁru Puro Yakkyu 6 (Japanese
baseball game)
World of Warcraft (massively multiplayer
online role-playing game)
Pokemon Go (mobile augmented reality
game)
Runaway: A Road Adventure point & click
adventure game)

College, undergraduates

Type of
analyses

Number of
participants

Video games (category)

School grade levels

Academic
ﬁeld

Physics

28

Rayman Raving Rabbids (mini party games)

College, unknown
High school, unknown

Middle school, unknown

High school, unknown

de Aldama and
Pozo (2019)
Masson et al.
(2011)
Jurcevic (2008)
Nordine (2011)

Enigmo (puzzle game), Railroad Tycoon 3
(management, strategy game)
Scorched 3D (artillery game)
Super Mario Bros. (platform game)

Angry Birds Space (puzzle and artillery game),
Cut the Rope (puzzle game)
Angry Birds Space (puzzle and artillery game)

Angry Birds (puzzle and artillery game)
Unreal Tournament 2004 (ﬁrst person
shooter), Angry Birds (puzzle and artillery
game)
Angry Birds (puzzle and artillery game)

Middle school, unknown
College, undergraduates

Preschool,
pre-kindergarten
High school, 9th grade

Wii Play Motion (mini party games)

College, undergraduates

Unknown
Unknown

51

(continued)

Qualitative
Qualitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

83
110

Quantitative

Qualitative
Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Quantitative

Qualitative
Qualitative

Qualitative

Type of
analyses

32

Unknown
30

111

634

20

Rayman Raving Rabbids (mini party games)

Dr. Kawashima’s Brain Training (puzzle game)

16
21

Minecraft (adventure sandbox game)
Tomb Raider (adventure game)

236

Unknown

L.A. Noire (adventure and puzzle game)

High school, college,
12th grade and
undergraduates
High school, 12th grade
Elementary school,
3rd grade
Elementary school,
unknown
Elementary school,
unknown
Elementary school, 3rd
and 4th grades
Elementary school, 3rd
and 4th grades
Dr. Kawashima’s Brain Training (puzzle game)

Number of
participants

Video games (category)

School grade levels

Herodotou
(2018)
Sun et al. (2015)

Berger and
McDougall
(2013)
Marlatt (2018)
Lacasa et al.
(2008)
Franceschini
et al. (2013)
Franceschini
et al. (2017)
O’Rourke
et al. (2017)
Miller and
Robertson
(2011)
Stansbury et al.
(2014)
Lamb (2013)
Novak and
Tassell (2015)

Native
language

Mathematics

Articles

Discipline

Table 1. (continued)
Humanities
and
social
sciences

Academic
ﬁeld

History

Civilization (turn-based strategy game)
Civilization (turn-based strategy game)

Civilization (turn-based strategy game)

Minecraft (adventure sandbox game)
Assassin’s Creed (adventure game)

High school, 9th grade
High school, 9th grade

High school, 9th grade

High school, unknown
High school, 9th to
12th grade

RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 (simulation,
management game)
Minecraft (adventure sandbox game)

Middle school, 5th and
6th grades
Middle school, 7th grade

Civilization (turn-based strategy game)

SimCity Creator (city-builder game)

High school, 9th grade

High school, 11th grade

Dance Dance Revolution (exergame)

College, undergraduates

Scientiﬁc
methods
and thinking

Herrero et al.
(2014)
Stansbury and
Munro (2013)
Monjelat et al.
(2012)
Shah and Foster
(2014)
Checa-Romero
and Pascual
Gómez
(2018)
Lee and Probert
(2010)
Squire and Barab
(2004)
Pagnotti and
Russell
(2012)
Charsky and
Ressler
(2011)
Craft (2016)
Gilbert (2019)

Spore (simulation, management game)

49
14

82

Unknown

18

(continued)

Qualitative
Qualitative

Quantitative

Qualitative

Qualitative

Qualitative

Quantitative

85


Quantitative

Qualitative

Quantitative

Qualitative

Qualitative

Type of
analyses

21

10

65

22

>500

Minecraft (adventure sandbox game)

Preschool to high school,
pre-kindergarten
to 12th grade
High school, 10th grade

Hobbs et al.
(2019)

Biology and
environmental
science

Number of
participants

Video games (category)

School grade levels

Articles

Discipline

Table 1. (continued)

Martinez et al.
11

Physical
education

Academic
ﬁeld

Physical
activity

Sport
knowledge

Krom (2012)
Jenny and Schary
(2014)
Jenny et al.
(2017)
Nyberg and
Meckbach
(2017)
Gibbs et al.
(2017)
Finco et al.
(2015)

Kim and Shin
(2016)
Sierra (2019)
Foster (2011)

Geography

Economy

Articles

Discipline

Table 1. (continued)

Just Dance (exergame)
Xbox-Kinect exergames

Elementary and middle
school, unknown

>20, 4 for
analyses

Just Dance (exergame)

High school, unknown

89

Don Bradman Cricket 14 (cricket game)

College, undergraduates
and graduates
Elementary to high
school, unknown

24

25

75
40

136
26

33

Number of
participants

SimCity (simulation management game)
RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 (simulation,
management game)
FarmVille (simulation game)
Madden NFL (U.S. football game)

SimCity (simulation, management game)

Video games (category)

College, unknown
Middle school, 4th to
6th grade
College, unknown
College, unkown

College, undergraduates

School grade levels

Qualitative

Qualitative

Qualitative

Quantitative

Quantitative
Quantitative

Qualitative
Quantitative

Qualitative

Type of
analyses

interactivity, which creates an additional cognitive load and diverts players’ attention away
from learning vocabulary. Three other studies compared the effect of supplementary
activities added to video games on vocabulary learning. First, students from various
language backgrounds who received explicit vocabulary and grammar activities before
playing The Sims scored signiﬁcantly higher on vocabulary and grammar questionnaires
than students with optional access to an online dictionary during the game and students
without additional activities or resources (Miller & Hegelheimer, 2006). However, Chen
and Yang (2013) demonstrated that Taiwanese students who were allowed to take notes
while playing the adventure game Bone did not outperform those who only played the
game, with both groups improving their vocabulary learning to the same extent. Thus, the
beneﬁts from supplementary activities elicited mixed results, but it seems that students
have a favorable attitude toward these added materials for their learning and view them as
important while playing the game (Ranalli, 2008). In most studies, students have expressed positive perceptions toward video game use for foreign language learning,
viewing such games as helpful and an additional motivation, particularly for vocabulary
learning (Janebi Enayat & Haghighatpasand, 2019).
Several studies also employed video games for literature learning. The use of L.A.
Noire allowed college students to link the game experience to other novels they already
studied (Berger & McDougall, 2013). The students mentioned that the game corresponded to a digital novel that caught their interest and positively changed their approach to literature. The famous video game Minecraft also was used with high school
students to reproduce scenes from a novel in the game (Marlatt, 2018). The teacher
noticed that students felt more engaged through the game and had a deeper understanding of the novel. Likewise, Lacasa et al. (2008) used the game Tomb Raider in a
primary school as a theme for theater scene writing and production. Children demonstrated better oral and written skills, along with better critical thinking abilities. It
seems that video games can function as an efﬁcient tool for literature classes, positively
impacting students’ engagement and critical thinking. However, future studies need to
assess whether video games signiﬁcantly beneﬁt students’ literacy skills. Two studies
have examined the effect of action and non-action video games on reading performance
in dyslexic children (Franceschini et al., 2013, 2017). The speed and accuracy of
children’s reading signiﬁcantly increased after playing action Rayman Raving Rabbids
mini-games, but not non-action mini-games. Further studies will be needed to understand how action video game use can improve reading skills acquisition, but these
two studies already demonstrated that improvement in attention abilities due to action
video gaming can explain enhancements in reading proﬁciency directly.

Sciences
Several studies have found that playing video games have a positive impact on learning
mathematics. Two studies have examined this effect using the game Dr. Kawashima’s
Brain Training. The ﬁrst study compared use of the game with a traditional learning
method with 10-year-old students learning mathematical operations (O’Rourke et al., 2017).

14
The group that played Dr. Kawashima’s Brain Training experienced signiﬁcant improvement in both speed and accuracy in their mathematical calculations compared
with the control group, which used traditional learning. Moreover, the interviews
during the intervention period indicated increasing motivation to learn mathematics.
Using the same game, Miller and Robertson (2011) reported signiﬁcant gains in
children’s mental computation skills from using the game compared with a control
group that attended traditional classes. These two studies were based on a relatively
large sample (236 and 634 students, respectively). More complex mathematical concepts
also can be improved by playing video games. Stansbury et al. (2014) found improvement in undergraduate students’ statistics knowledge from playing Wii Play Motion
mini-games. The concepts of parabolas and vectors also can be learned more quickly by
playing Angry Birds (Lamb, 2013). The beneﬁts from learning mathematics by playing
video games need to be examined further in future research, but an early conclusion can
be drawn because current research has indicated that playing action video games leads to
improvements in the cognitive skills necessary to learn mathematics, such as working
memory and spatial abilities (Novak & Tassell, 2015).
All the selected studies on teaching physics through video gaming focused on
learning motion concepts. Three studies examined this through popular games such as
Angry Birds. The ﬁrst one assessed this game’s effect on preschoolers’ understanding
of projectile motion (Herodotou, 2018). After playing the game, 5-year-old children
demonstrated a signiﬁcantly better understanding of projectile motion and were able to
predict parabola movements correctly. Another study compared the use of Angry Birds
Space and Cut the Rope with a traditional learning method among high school students
(Sun et al., 2015). Students who played Angry Birds Space tended to improve their
understanding of circular-motion concepts, while students who played Cut the Rope
signiﬁcantly improved their knowledge of pendulum concepts. The effect was signiﬁcant, measured through the use of concept maps to assess students’ learning, but not
with multiple-choice exams. A third study found that using Angry Birds alone may not
be sufﬁcient to elicit signiﬁcant learning of motion concepts. de Aldama and Pozo
(2019) added a speciﬁc instructional method to the game, providing an epistemic goal
for students by suggesting questions that they needed to answer while playing the game.
Compared with the control group and the group that played the game without questions,
participants with an epistemic goal demonstrated signiﬁcant improvement in their
understanding of motion concepts. Other types of games also can enhance the learning
of motion concepts. With Enigmo, an arcade-style game, Masson et al. (2011) found a
gain in students’ problem-solving skills related to object motion. Finally, two qualitative studies that evaluated learning about projectile motion through play highlighted
students’ positive reactions. Jurcevic (2008) observed that college students who played
the artillery game Scorched 3D discovered physics concepts about angles and speeds
through the game on their own. Students then reported having fun using this game in
physics class. Likewise, it seems that most of the students were highly motivated and
strongly engaged in learning projectile motion concepts through Super Mario Bros.
(Nordine, 2011). However, the teacher noticed that students who were uncomfortable

Martinez et a
with problem-solving in informal settings experienced some frustration, probably
because they were not accustomed to open-ended problems and needed a more clearly
deﬁned approach for their learning.
Fewer studies focused on learning biology and environmental sciences through the
use of video games. Only two qualitative studies were identiﬁed in this domain. Hobbs
et al. (2019) set up the Science Hunters Project using Minecraft. Students of all ages
were invited to solve speciﬁc problems in the game to explore science topics and gain
knowledge about natural and environmental science subjects, such as volcanoes,
animal habitats, ﬂowers, and biomes. The teachers who implemented this project in
class noticed improvement in students’ learning and understanding of these various
themes. Students were motivated to play the game and learn about science through the
game. Moreover, teachers noted that the project may encourage students to attend
college. The second study assessed the game Spore as a learning tool in high school
biology class (Herrero et al., 2014). Students had to decide whether the theories of
evolution represented in the game were in agreement with Darwin’s evolution theory
and natural selection concepts. Students applied their academic knowledge in the game
experience and sharpened their understanding of biological evolution concepts. The
positive effect would come from playing the game, but only if it were combined with
interactions with the teacher or other students. Thus, Spore seems to be a good tool for
fostering students’ interest and biology learning through interactive way. Despite their
promising results, these two qualitative studies are insufﬁcient to conﬁrm a signiﬁcant
positive effect of video game use on natural science learning. Thus, this beneﬁt needs to
be conﬁrmed in future quantitative studies.
Besides academic knowledge in science, video games also can be used to develop
scientiﬁc methods and thinking. For example, Stansbury and Munro (2013) used the
Wii game Dance Dance Revolution to teach factorial designs to undergraduate psychology students. Students used the dance scores to learn and implement mixed
factorial designs. Compared with students who received a traditional lecture, those who
played the game signiﬁcantly improved their performance on a factorial design
knowledge questionnaire. Even more generally, video games can be used to develop
scientiﬁc thinking and creativity. For example, SimCity Creator seems to be a solid tool
for developing students’ problem-solving skills (Monjelat et al., 2012). By playing this
game, the students created a representation of in-game problems and solved it using
different strategies. Likewise, playing RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 signiﬁcantly increased
middle school students’ systems thinking knowledge (Shah & Foster, 2014). Regarding
the development of students’ creativity, Checa-Romero and Pascual Gómez (2018)
found that students scored signiﬁcantly higher on a creativity test after building the
house of their dreams in Minecraft.
Therefore, these ﬁndings highlight the beneﬁts of playing video games for students’
scientiﬁc skills, but further quantitative studies need to conﬁrm these beneﬁts as they
relate to problem-solving processes, logical thinking, and creativity.

1
Humanities and Social Sciences
Most studies on the beneﬁts of video games on learning history focused on the use of the
game Civilization in high school. Lee and Probert (2010) observed that this game helped
reinforce U.S. history concepts on wars, military alliances, politics, and geography.
However, the teacher was concerned that the students remained relatively passive and did
not participate often during the lesson. Squire and Barab (2004) also observed that
Civilization aided learning of world history and geography facts and deﬁnitions, but that
students’ engagement depended on their perception of the game’s value for learning.
Many students felt that the game was complex and that its relevance to history lessons was
not clear enough. Thus, not all students understood its value for learning history. Likewise,
Pagnotti and Russell (2012) found that even though students were motivated and
comfortable with the game, they were unsure of its usefulness in learning history. To
enhance Civilization’s educational value, Charsky and Ressler (2011) asked students to
use or create concept maps while playing the game. However, with this addition, students’
attention, motivation, satisfaction, and positive perception of the game signiﬁcantly
decreased during the game session. Further studies with a quantitative research design are
needed to assess Civilization’s actual beneﬁts on learning history and whether it is an
appropriate game in an educational context. Indeed, other video games can be used during
history lessons. Craft (2016) used Minecraft to teach high school students about ancient
Rome’s history. After building Roman temples in a 3D model of Rome, students scored
higher grades on history and Latin assessments. Assassin’s Creed also seems to be a good
tool for history lessons, especially considering that this game offers a mode dedicated to
history learning—the “Discovery Tour” (Gilbert, 2019). Students who played the game
had a more critical perspective on history, could reconsider their preconceptions of
historical facts, and could discuss the game’s historical accuracy. Once again, further
quantitative studies will be needed to conﬁrm the beneﬁts from playing these video games
on learning history, and the most appropriate conditions for using this tool need to be
speciﬁed in particular.
Very few studies speciﬁcally have investigated learning geographical concepts.
Only one qualitative study found that college students who played SimCity seemed to
enhance their understanding of urban geography theories (Kim & Shin, 2016).
Moreover, interviews revealed that students were motivated to learn new skills through
the game, critically assessed their in-game work, compared the game logic to real-world
contexts, and experienced development in their geographic creativity through the game.
Management simulations such as SimCity also are used for social studies and economics learning. Sierra (2019) noticed that playing SimCity helps students understand
how public sector interventions work. Students also improved their time management,
critical thinking, and problem-solving skills. Likewise, Foster (2011) found that
students who played RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 scored signiﬁcantly higher on economics
and social studies knowledge questionnaires. The students who played FarmVille had a
better mean score on their managerial accounting ﬁnal exam than those who attended a
traditional lecture, but this beneﬁt was statistically not signiﬁcant (Krom, 2012). All

Martinez et a
these ﬁndings indicate that students seem to beneﬁt from certain video games in
geography, social sciences, and economics learning. However, more studies need to be
conducted to conﬁrm this beneﬁt.

Physical Education
Several studies indicated that playing video games can be beneﬁcial for physical
education. Two studies examined sports knowledge and found that, compared with a
control group, college students who played a U.S. football video game (Jenny &
Schary, 2014) or a cricket video game (Jenny et al., 2017) scored higher on sports
knowledge questionnaires (rules, terminology, positions, etc.) and were interested in
watching and playing U.S. football or playing cricket. Two other studies demonstrated
how exergames (physical exercise video games) help to teach physical education. The
famous exergame Just Dance appears to be a good tool to teach dance. Nyberg and
Meckbach (2017) observed that students from elementary school learned several dance
movements effectively through this game. Students discerned the different aspects of
movements that they learned. Gibbs et al. (2017) also observed that Just Dance helps
high school students learn dance moves and develop their ability to create new
movements and choreography. Exergames also seem to be good tools for students’
motivation in physical education classes. Finco et al. (2015) used Xbox-Kinect exergames only with elementary and middle school students who were unmotivated to
participate in physical education classes. Compared with a traditional lesson, the games
stimulated students’ motivation and interest, as the students engaged much more freely
in physical activities. Moreover, teachers noticed that exergaming improved students’
social skills as they seemed less introverted and more collaborative with and supportive
of each other.

Discussion
This integrative review was conducted to assess the literature on entertainment video
game use in academic learning methods. Following Siddaway et al.’s (2019) guidelines,
the literature search yielded 49 articles published between 2005 and 2019, spanning
almost all academic ﬁelds. The analysis of these articles provides scientiﬁc and
pedagogical insights on the implementation of entertainment video games in school
settings and their effects on academic learning.
First, the literature indicates that the use of entertainment video games for academic
learning represents a recent and dynamic ﬁeld (83.7% of the selected articles were
published after 2010). Entertainment video games can be implemented effectively in
academic curricula across all grades, from preschool to college, and are beneﬁcial in
almost all academic disciplines. Promising results have been reported particularly in the
literature and science disciplines (foreign language and mathematics learning,
Ebrahimzadeh, 2017; Stansbury et al., 2014). However, mixed results were found for
history (Charsky & Ressler, 2011). Students did not understand a video game-based

1
method’s relevance in history class, while its usefulness is better perceived for other
disciplines (Pagnotti & Russell, 2012; Squire & Barab, 2004). All the selected studies
on entertainment video games and learning history took a qualitative approach; thus,
further quantitative studies are needed to deﬁne the necessary conditions to improve
history learning signiﬁcantly through entertainment video games.
It should be noted that not all academic ﬁelds have been studied to the same extent.
Foreign language learning is the most widely studied discipline, with 25% of selected
articles examining the acquisition of a second language. Indeed, the current trend of
playing online video games allows for interactions between players worldwide and can
be viewed as an efﬁcient and playful way to practice a foreign language with native
speakers. In comparison, only one study focused on geographical learning (Kim &
Shin, 2016), and only two studies examined natural and environmental sciences
(Herrero et al., 2014; Hobbs et al., 2019). A limitation of this systematic review is the
failure to address certain disciplines, such as engineering, technology, and arts, because no research focuses directly on these disciplines. They mostly have been studied
through game design and not through the direct use of video games (Coller & Scott,
2009; Doerschuk et al., 2013). Developing and designing a video game in class
enhances programming and creativity skills, but playing already-existing games also
seems useful for teaching programming or developing artistic creativity. For example,
Minecraft is a good tool for developing students’ creativity and programming skills, and it
is accessible even to younger students (Overby & Jones, 2015; Wilkinson et al., 2013).
Therefore, further studies are needed in several academic domains—including history,
geography, environmental and natural sciences, programming, and arts—to conﬁrm and
complete already-existing literature and determine whether entertainment video game use
in class can beneﬁt all academic learnings.
As illustrated in Figure 2, most selected articles focused on college and high school
students, which is probably because video games’ acceptability in education is higher
for older students. The same bias is found in studies investigating video games’
cognitive beneﬁts, which focus mainly on college students (for a review, see Bediou
et al., 2018). However, younger students from middle school already are regular video
gamers (Oﬂu & Yalcin, 2019) and several games are recommended to ages 3 or 7 years
and over. Therefore, future studies need to assess whether video games are beneﬁcial
for students of all ages and in all academic domains, especially domains that are
currently absent from the scientiﬁc ﬁeld.
Almost all selected articles reported signiﬁcant beneﬁts from entertainment video
games on academic learning, but the experimental approach to studying entertainment
video games’ effects on academic learning remains mostly qualitative. School settings
are ecological environments that allow for applied research in class but limit experimental control. Control groups and comparisons with a traditional learning method
often are missing. Half the selected articles are based on qualitative assessments of
academic learning and did not compare their DGBL methods to a traditional learning
method or did not perform pretest and posttest learning measures. Although teachers
and researchers’ observations can be very relevant, a real need exists for studies with a
Martinez et al
quantitative approach to conﬁrm and complete qualitative observations, particularly for
literature, natural and environmental sciences, history, geography, and economics.
Moreover, it should be noted that all articles were selected in peer-reviewed scientiﬁc
journals and were more likely to be published as they report meaningful results about
entertainment video games’ beneﬁts on academic learning. Further studies are needed
to systematically compare video game use in class with a traditional lecture to determine the precise beneﬁt of video games on academic learning and improve research
quality in this ﬁeld. These studies need to be pre-registered in order to avoid publication
bias and improve credibility of ﬁndings (Nosek et al., 2019).
A ﬁnal issue to address is the mechanisms underlying entertainment video games’
beneﬁcial effects on academic learning. These mediators between video games and
learning remain under-examined. The explanatory factor most often presented is
students’ motivation. Indeed, DGBL leads to stronger student motivation and,
therefore, to better learning performances (Kim & Shin, 2016; Nordine, 2011;
O’Rourke et al., 2017). However, aside from this motivational effect, other factors
also can explain entertainment video games’ beneﬁts on academic learning. Indeed,
entertainment video games have been proven to enhance cognitive functioning,
particularly executive functioning (for a review, see Choi et al., 2020), and this
literature review suggests that some of the video gaming beneﬁts on academic
learning can be attributed to improved cognitive functioning. Thus, another
mechanism that explains entertainment video games’ beneﬁts on academic learning
could be the improvement of cognitive performance due to video gaming practices.
Some studies already have demonstrated that improvements in working memory,
spatial abilities, or attention skills as a result of entertainment video gaming can
explain mathematics and reading improvement directly (Franceschini et al., 2013,
2017; Novak & Tassell, 2015). Thus, future studies need to identify cognitive
functions that are most impacted by entertainment video games and related the most
to academic learning. Moreover, very few studies on cognitive training’s effect on
academic learning exist, so it is also necessary to deﬁne whether entertainment video
games integrated into a school curriculum can enhance students’ cognitive functioning and whether this improvement predicts entertainment video games’ beneﬁts
to academic learning.

Conclusion
Given the popularity and beneﬁts from entertainment video games on cognition, we
believed that it was essential to determine whether they could be an effective alternative learning method in educational settings. This systematic review showed
that entertainment video games are beneﬁcial tools for academic learning and can be
implemented effectively in almost all academic disciplines and for all grades. Today
is a favorable era for the use of entertainment video games as tools in the classroom.
Most schools have the technological means necessary to implement a DGBL method
in class. Moreover, the entertainment video game market offers a wide range of

choices suitable for diverse academic learning objectives. Despite their beneﬁts,
entertainment video games are still used rarely in schools. Teachers, parents, and
even students are not always convinced of their usefulness for learning. Future
studies need to investigate and highlight entertainment video games’ practical value
in the education sector further, as well as provide a quantitative assessment of
academic learning through video gaming and deﬁne what mechanisms mediate
entertainment video gaming sessions’ effects on academic learning in class. This
type of research surely will increase video games’ acceptability level in the school
environment in the future.