horticulturae
Review

Plant Tolerance to Drought Stress in the Presence of Supporting
Bacteria and Fungi: An Efficient Strategy in Horticulture
Agnieszka Hanaka 1, * , Ewa Ozimek 2 , Emilia Reszczyńska 1 , Jolanta Jaroszuk-Ściseł 2 and Maria Stolarz 1

Citation: Hanaka, A.; Ozimek, E.;
Reszczyńska, E.; Jaroszuk-Ściseł, J.;
Stolarz, M. Plant Tolerance to
Drought Stress in the Presence of
Supporting Bacteria and Fungi: An
Efficient Strategy in Horticulture.
Horticulturae 2021, 7, 390. https://
doi.org/10.3390/horticulturae7100390
Academic Editor: Alessandra
Francini

Department of Plant Physiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology,
Institute of Biological Sciences, Maria Curie-Skłodowska University, Akademicka 19, 20-031 Lublin, Poland;
emilia.reszczynska@umcs.pl (E.R.); maria.stolarz@umcs.pl (M.S.)
Department of Industrial and Environmental Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology,
Institute of Biological Sciences, Maria Curie-Skłodowska University, Akademicka 19, 20-031 Lublin, Poland;
ewa.ozimek@umcs.pl (E.O.); jolanta.jaroszuk-scisel@umcs.pl (J.J.-Ś.)
Correspondence: agnieszka.hanaka@umcs.pl

Abstract: Increasing temperature leads to intensive water evaporation, contributing to global warming and consequently leading to drought stress. These events are likely to trigger modifications
in plant physiology and microbial functioning due to the altered availability of nutrients. Plants
exposed to drought have developed different strategies to cope with stress by morphological, physiological, anatomical, and biochemical responses. First, visible changes influence plant biomass and
consequently limit the yield of crops. The presented review was undertaken to discuss the impact of
climate change with respect to drought stress and its impact on the performance of plants inoculated
with plant growth-promoting microorganisms (PGPM). The main challenge for optimal performance
of horticultural plants is the application of selected, beneficial microorganisms which actively support plants during drought stress. The most frequently described biochemical mechanisms for plant
protection against drought by microorganisms are the production of phytohormones, antioxidants
and xeroprotectants, and the induction of plant resistance. Rhizospheric or plant surface-colonizing
(rhizoplane) and interior (endophytic) bacteria and fungi appear to be a suitable alternative for
drought-stress management. Application of various biopreparations containing PGPM seems to
provide hope for a relatively cheap, easy to apply and efficient way of alleviating drought stress in
plants, with implications in productivity and food condition.
Keywords: climate change; drought stress; biopreparations; plant stimulation; plant growth-promoting
microorganisms

Received: 1 September 2021
Accepted: 5 October 2021
Published: 11 October 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
The horticulture system is affected by various abiotic and biotic stresses which directly
and indirectly influence soil fertility, plant health and crop yield [1–3]. These stresses result
in the loss of soil microbial diversity, soil fertility and availability of nutrients [4]. The
condition of the soil under drought strictly corresponds to plant performance, showing
consequences in plant morphology, anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry. With reduction
in seed germination and seedling growth, plant height, nutrition and biomass are weakened
resulting in yield limitation. The huge variety of changes taking place in horticultural
plants and the mechanisms of counteracting stress they produce result from a very wide
range of horticultural plant species, including types of crops such as those distinguished
by the International Society for Horticultural Science (ISHS): (1) tree, bush and perennial
fruits, (2) perennial bush and tree nuts, (3) vegetables (roots, tubers, shoots, stems, leaves,
fruits and flowers of edible and mainly annual plants), (4) medicinal and aromatic plants,
(5) ornamental plants, (6) trees, shrubs, turf and ornamental grasses propagated and
produced in nurseries for use in landscaping or for establishing fruit orchards or other
crop production units [5]. Facing the current, rapid climate changes, the cultivation of

plants is strongly affected by abiotic stresses, which additionally intensify the influence of
biotic factors such as pests causing serious plant infections [4]. In this dramatic situation,
plant associations with rhizospheric [6,7] and endophytic [8,9] microorganisms colonizing
the rhizoplane, rhizosphere and plant tissues should be considered as the main stress
relievers [10–14]. Three types of effects of microorganisms associated with plants are
distinguished: beneficial, deleterious and neutral ones. Based on the positive effects of
microbes, two main groups are listed, plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) or
more generally, plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) and plant growth-promoting
fungi (PGPF) [14–19]. All mentioned groups of microorganisms can serve as biocontrol
agents, biofertilizers, phytostimulators and phytoremediators [2,12,20–22].
The most frequently described biochemical mechanisms of plant protection against
drought by microorganisms are the production of phytohormones, antioxidants and xeroprotectants [23]. Trehalose can act as xeroprotectant triggering the plant-defense system to
counteract the damage caused by drought. It has been shown that microorganisms with
tolerance to desiccation have the ability to protect some plants from drought. It seems to
be dependent on the microorganism’s ability to regulate the concentration of trehalose in
the plant as a signal of drying damage.
In horticultural production, plant–microbe interactions should be considered the main
factor of plant growth, protection against abiotic stresses and resistance against adverse
conditions [24,25] (e.g., in arid and semiarid areas), and these interactions could also be
beneficial in alleviating drought stress in plants [26]. Profound knowledge about the
mechanisms of plant–microbe interactions can offer several strategies to increase plant
productivity in an environmentally friendly manner [27]. Therefore, in the increasing
market for plant growth-promoting products, it is important to develop a successful
strategy for microorganism screening [28]. Furthermore, the European Green Deal (EGD),
provided by the European Commission in December 2019, is currently focused on the
application of natural products in agriculture and horticulture instead of chemical plantprotection products. To cope with this idea, new efficient biological ingredients in the face
of changing climate are desired. Nowadays, the most significant consequence of climate
change is drought stress [29].
To deal with severe drought stress in the near future, it is strictly necessary to determine the interactions, mechanisms and signaling pathways responsible for increased
drought tolerance in terrestrial organisms. The concept of drought and water deficit is
difficult to define, but the literature data [30–32] indicate that drought can be defined as a
state of the total water capacity being within the range of 12–20% for a period of 16 days.
Moreover, the drought state can achieve at least two degrees—mild and severe [33]—while
the water deficit [34] refers to the state of water capacity falling below 30%. To handle the
drought effect, plants can be supported by both microorganisms inhabiting the rhizoplane
(i.e., those adhering to the surface of the roots) and rhizosphere (i.e., living at a further distance within the root secretions) [34,35], as well as endophytic microorganisms inhabiting
the inside of the root [36]. The application of plant growth-promoting microorganisms
seems to provide hope for a cheap, easy to apply and efficient way of alleviating drought
stress in plants with implications in productivity and food condition. The presented review
was undertaken to discuss the impact of climate change with respect to drought stress, and
to emphasize that modifications in microorganisms composition and their traits should
indicate new solutions in the search for efficient compounds of biopreparations supporting
plant growth.
2. Climate Change
Global climate change is expected to be considerably critical over the century, leading
to influences on various parameters of the environment [17]. Not only atmospheric CO2
concentrations derived from natural and anthropogenic sources, but also surface temperatures will be increasing gradually, likely from 1.0 to 5.7 ◦ C by the end of this century [37].
Moreover, some regions, such as the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East (EMME),

have been classified as a climate “global hot-spot”. In the EMME, the temperature is
predicted to increase from 3.5 to 7 ◦ C by the end of the century [38]. Additionally, it is
anticipated that rising air temperatures will increase the frequency of extreme weather
disasters such as heat waves, drought and heavy precipitation occurrence to a level that
has never been monitored before [37]. These strongly temperature-dependent climate
changes, combined with water scarcity, will lead to enhanced drought throughout the
globe, hurting whole ecosystems and different organisms, including the distribution of
plants and microorganisms [17].
In climate studies, calculations concerning crop evapotranspiration are also important [17]. For instance, in South East Europe, the mean annual crop evapotranspiration
in the period 1991–2020 reached from 56 mm to 1297 mm, while averages for the future
30 years (between 2021 and 2050), are expected to vary from 59 mm to 1410 mm [17]. These
predictions consider the impact of future climate warming. Global warming increases
water evaporation and consequently leads to drought stress [39]. High temperature is the
crucial factor in melting glaciers and increasing the sea level [8]. The changes in polar and
subpolar climate zones also correspond with climate warming [40–42].
Climate change results in altered environmental conditions and negative effects on
natural ecosystems, which are likely to trigger modifications in plant physiology [43] and
microbial functioning [44] based on the availability of nutrients [4] or signal compounds [2].
It is certain that not only plants, but also plant-associated microorganisms might be remarkably changed in abundance, diversity and activity [44,45]. Both increased temperature and
drought may activate correspondent adjustments in plants and microorganisms and their
mutual interactions [17]. The adaptational challenges of horticultural plants are not only
associated with long-term average climate change, but also with the short-term changes
driven by weather extremes and interannual fluctuations [46]. Drought-related cereal
production losses are increasing by more than 3% yr−1 [46]. In the face of the continuous raise of the world population to an estimated nine billion by 2050 [47], withstanding
drought stress according to sustainable agriculture/horticulture is a challenge for the 21st
century [48].
3. Plants under Drought Stress
Drought is an uncontrolled stress which affects almost all stages of plant growth and
development directly or indirectly [43]. Most of the drought effects on plants are associated
with high temperature. Physiological processes occur mostly in temperatures ranging from
0 ◦ C to 40 ◦ C. However, the optimal temperatures for the different stages of growth and
development are narrower and strongly depend on the species and ecological origin [1,49].
Plants exposed to drought stress develop numerous responses in different areas, from
morphological and physiological mechanisms to anatomical and biochemical or molecular
ones [1,39,50] (Figure 1).
Four types of morphological and physiological response strategies to drought stress
are highlighted, i.e., tolerance, avoidance, escape and recovery [51] (Figure 2). Tolerance is
defined as the plant’s ability to resist dehydration using osmoprotectants [52]. Avoidance is
based on the undisturbed occurrence of physiological processes (such as stomata regulation,
root system development). Escape is the adjustment of the plant’s life cycle by shortening
of the life cycle to avoid drought stress. Recovery is the ability of a plant to restart growth
after the exposure to the extreme drought stress [53].
The morphological features of drought stress include limited seed germination and
seedling growth, reduced size, area and number of leaves, restricted number of stomata,
reduced number of flowers, disturbed stem and root elongation, impaired plant height,
growth, development and yield, and reduced fresh and dry biomass [7,39,50].

re 1. Some morphological, anatomical, physiological and biochemical plant responses to drought stress (modifie
asis of [1,39,50]).

Four types of morphological and physiological response strategies to droug
are highlighted, i.e., tolerance, avoidance, escape and recovery [51] (Figure 2). T
is defined as the plant’s ability to resist dehydration using osmoprotectants [52
ance is based on the undisturbed occurrence of physiological processes (such as
regulation, root system development). Escape is the adjustment of the plant’s life
shortening of the life cycle to avoid drought stress. Recovery is the ability of a
restart growth after the exposure to the extreme drought stress [53].
Figure
Some morphological,
anatomical,
physiological and
and biochemical
plant
responses
to drought
stress (modified
on
Figure 1.
Some1. morphological,
anatomical,
physiological
biochemical
plant
responses
to drought
stress (modified
on
the
basis
of
[1,39,50]).
the basis of [1,39,50]).

Four types of morphological and physiological response strategies to drought stress
are highlighted, i.e., tolerance, avoidance, escape and recovery [51] (Figure 2). Tolerance
is defined as the plant’s ability to resist dehydration using osmoprotectants [52]. Avoid
ance is based on the undisturbed occurrence of physiological processes (such as stomata
regulation, root system development). Escape is the adjustment of the plant’s life cycle by
shortening of the life cycle to avoid drought stress. Recovery is the ability of a plant to
restart growth after the exposure to the extreme drought stress [53].

Figure 2. Response strategies to drought stress (modified on the basis of [1,39,50,51]).

Figure 2. Response strategies to drought stress (modified on the basis of [1,39,50,51]).

The morphological features of drought stress include limited seed germina
seedling growth, reduced size, area and number of leaves, restricted number of

In order to adapt to the adverse environment, avoid drought and improve water
availability, plants increase the root length and their number [54]. Drought significantly
affects the plant’s cell elongation and division, its growth and its development, which is
mainly caused by the reduction in cellular differentiation, plant growth and yield [50]. The
negative effect on the leaf area under the drought condition could be dependent on the
reduction in the leaf number, size and longevity, combined with temperature, leaf turgor
pressure and assimilation rate [55]. The reduction in plant height and shoot dry weight
results in a lower quality of yield [54].
The morphological responses are most frequently combined with anatomical changes
in plants exposed to drought, e.g., thickening of cell walls, increased cuticle layer on the
leaf surface and improved development of vascular tissues [8,56]. Drought stress results
in anatomical changes in the lower and upper epidermis, mesophyll tissue and vascular
bundle diameter of leaves [57]. The negative anatomical effects on the leaves are based on
a shortage of water supply from the soil, limitations in nutrients uptake, and reduction
in photosynthetic rate. Plant hydraulic conductivity is modulated during drought stress
leading to the disruption of water flow in the xylem vessels (embolism) or modifications in
the vessel size and function [58]. Consequently, the reduced water flow from the root to
the shoot causes stomatal closure and transpiration disruption [50].
Drought affects the physiological traits such as the leaf relative water content and
water potential, stomatal conductance, transpiration and photosynthetic rates [59,60].
Reduced water content and water conductivity are responsible for the loss of turgidity and
limited stomatal conductance resulting in restricted gaseous exchange (the rate of carbon
assimilation) [8,61]. Furthermore, climatic conditions, e.g., higher temperature, drought
and soil aeration reduce the movement of nutrients in the soil, their uptake by roots and
transport in plant tissues [62].
Photosynthesis can be disrupted through the modulation of the electron transport
chain and can increase the rate of biochemical reactions catalyzed by different enzymes.
Above a certain temperature threshold, enzymes lose their function, influencing the plant
tissue tolerance to drought [1,63,64]. Drought stress also affects the translocation of nutrients and the composition of minerals, antioxidants and proteins [39,52]. Under stress
conditions, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly generated [65,66] causing cell damage
and plant necrosis [67]. Additionally, plant hormones and primary and secondary metabolites are modified [1]. Drought is the elicitor that can increase the content of secondary
metabolites in plant tissues such as flavonoids, phenolics or more specific molecules, e.g.,
glycosides and alkaloids [68,69].
Crosstalk between drought and salinity stresses results in secondary stresses such as
oxidative and osmotic ones [66]. Drought stress is a major agricultural problem worldwide and almost all of the main agricultural lands are affected by drought stress. The
potential mechanisms of drought tolerance include: (1) production of phytohormones
(such as indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), cytokinins and abscisic acid (ABA)) (2) synthesis of exopolysaccharides (3) activity of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) deaminase
(4) induced systemic tolerance [66,70].
4. Mechanisms of Resistance in Plants
Plants are capable of defending themselves against numerous stress factors, both
biotic and abiotic ones, by activating very effective pathways of immunity (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Immune response of plants against stress factors (modified on the basis of [71,72]); PAL—phenylalanine ammonia-

Figurelyase;
3. Immune
response
of plants against
stress factors
the basis ofacquired
[71,72]);resistance;
PAL—phenylalanine
TAL—tyrosine
ammonia-lyase;
ISR—induced
systemic(modified
resistance, on
SAR—systemic
JA—jasmonic ammonia-lyase;
TAL—tyrosine
ammonia-lyase;
ISR—induced
systemic
resistance,
SAR—systemic
acquired
resistance; JA—
acid; ET—ethylene; SA—salicylic acid; PR proteins—pathogenesis related proteins.
jasmonic acid; ET—ethylene; SA—salicylic acid; PR proteins—pathogenesis related proteins.
The plant might acquire resistance against phytopathogenic infection due to the induction of plant defense responses driven by the very wide range of interactions with
The plant might acquire resistance against phytopathogenic infection due to the in
above- and below-ground microorganisms [6,73,74]. Several microbial species have disduction
of plant defense responses driven by the very wide range of interactions wit
played plant-priming phenomena. The priming process of plants is typically known in
aboveand
below-ground
Several microbial
induced systemic
resistancemicroorganisms
(ISR) and systemic[6,73,74].
acquired resistance
(SAR), andspecies
microbe-have dis
played
plant-priming
phenomena.
The priming
process
ofisplants
is typically
associated
molecular pattern
(MAMP)-triggered
immunity.
ISR
mediated
through theknown i
involvement
of
phytohormones,
e.g.,
ethylene
(ET)
and
jasmonic
acid
(JA),
and the
de-microbe
induced systemic resistance (ISR) and systemic acquired resistance (SAR),
and
fense
responses
against
phytopathogenic
microorganisms
are
activated
very
quickly.
SAR
associated molecular pattern (MAMP)-triggered immunity. ISR is mediated through th
and MAMP-triggered immunity are induced as a first line, and unlike ISR, they utilize
involvement of phytohormones, e.g., ethylene (ET) and jasmonic acid (JA), and the de
salicylic acid (SA) as signal substance of the plant resistance pathways [6,73,74]. The
fense
responses against
phytopathogenic
microorganisms
activated
SA
nonpathogenic
microorganisms
and various
organic elicitors, are
mainly
derivedvery
fromquickly.
miandcroorganisms,
MAMP-triggered
immunity
are
induced
as
a
first
line,
and
unlike
ISR,
they
utiliz
act by inducing systemic acquired resistance (SAR) [75]. To elicit defense
salicylic
acidin(SA)
as signal
substancesecrete
of theseveral
plant resistance
pathways
[6,73,74].
responses
plants,
microorganisms
molecules such
as antibiotics
(i.e.,The non
2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol,
phenazines
synthesized
by
Pseudomonas
species,
and
cyclic
pathogenic microorganisms and various organic elicitors, mainly derived from microo
lipopeptides
such
as surfactin,
synthesized
by Bacillus
strains),(SAR)
volatiles,
quorum-sensing
ganisms,
act by
inducing
systemic
acquired
resistance
[75].
To elicit defense re
signals (N-acyl homoserine lactone of Gram-negative bacteria), proteins and small lowsponses in plants, microorganisms secrete several molecules such as antibiotics (i.e., 2,4
molecular weight compounds [6]. Natural bioactive compounds of microbial, Protist or
diacetylphloroglucinol,
phenazines
synthesized
by Pseudomonas
species,
and cycl
plant origins with the ability
to protect plants
against phytopathogens
can have
fungicidal
lipopeptides
such
as
surfactin,
synthesized
by
Bacillus
strains),
volatiles,
quorum-sensin
effects (can kill pathogens) or fungistatic effects (can limit development of phytopathogens),
as well
as being
able to induce
plant defense
reactions as elicitors
[71,76].
Everyand
factor
signals
(N-acyl
homoserine
lactone
of Gram-negative
bacteria),
proteins
small low
(physical,
chemical,
biotic,
abiotic
and
their
mixture)
that
induces
plant
immunity
or
stimumolecular weight compounds [6]. Natural bioactive compounds of microbial, Protist o
lates
the defense
plant is plants
called an
elicitorphytopathogens
and is defined depending
on its
plant
origins
withmechanisms
the ability in
to aprotect
against
can have
fungicida
origin and molecular structure [68]. MAMP-type molecules are exoelicitors of microbial
effects
(can
kill
pathogens)
or
fungistatic
effects
(can
limit
development
of
phytopatho
origin. Pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-type molecules are exoelicitors of
gens),
as wellorganism
as being
ableDamage/danger-associated
to induce plant defensemolecular
reactions
as elicitors
[71,76]. Ever
pathogenic
origin.
pattern
(DAMP)-type

factor (physical, chemical, biotic, abiotic and their mixture) that induces plant immunit
or stimulates the defense mechanisms in a plant is called an elicitor and is defined de
pending on its origin and molecular structure [68]. MAMP-type molecules are exoelicitor
of microbial origin. Pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-type molecules ar

molecules are endoelicitors of plant origin released during phytopathogen infection or produced under various stresses, [77–79]. Receptor proteins in the plasma membrane-pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) recognize particular molecular patterns of MAMP/PAMP
and DAMP molecules [80,81]. The priming or PAMP-triggered, (PTI)-type local immunity,
which arises in the absence of virulent pathogens, is due to the rapid onset of intracellularsignaling-pathway activation leading to a very fast and effective defense responses in the
plant [82].
In plants, a range of abiotic and biotic elicitors can strengthen tolerance to drought
stress, including alginate-derived oligosaccharides, ketoconazole, 2-aminoethanol, ABA,
brassinosteroids, and beneficial microorganisms such as Rhizobium strains, endo- and exomycorrhizal rhizospheric and endophytic nonpathogenic fungi. These elicitors reduced the
content of monodehydroascorbate, prevented the accumulation of ROS, increased activities
of antioxidant enzymes, and maintained fresh and dry weights, grain yield, and relative
water content in a variety of plants in response to drought stress [83]. The term “induced
systemic tolerance” (IST) has been suggested for PGPB-induced physical and chemical
alterations that result in enhanced tolerance to abiotic stresses [70,84,85].
5. Bacteria Supporting Horticultural Crops
The most promising solution for the future of modern horticulture seems to be the
skillful use of biopreparations in the conventional crops and not limiting their use to a
narrow range of ecological or organic farming crops. Biopreparations include at least three
types of products: (1) biocontrol, or biological plant protection inhibiting directly (antagonism, competition) or indirectly (defense responses) the growth of phytopathogenic fungi
or bacteria and other pests such as insects and nematodes, (2) biostimulation, positively
affecting the plant development, increasing the plant biomass and yield, and (3) biofertilization, which provides nutrients and enhances plant nutrient uptake [6,29,71], (Table 1).
The components of these biopreparations are very diverse, ranging from various inoculum types of microorganisms (either single or consortia of endophytic bacteria, fungi and
Protista strains belonging to the plant growth-promoting group), through to metabolites,
including phytohormonal and hormonelike substances or parts of microorganism cells,
to various metabolites and structural compounds derived from microorganisms, Protista
and plants often acting as the plant resistance elicitors [6,86]. Interestingly, the components
of biopreparations are composed in such a way that, while performing biocontrol, biofertilizer and biostimulant functions [87–91], they reduce the impact of stresses caused by
the numerous and dynamically changing environmental factors. Among these factors are
rapid shifts in the temperature and humidity leading to the formation of drought, which
reduces the availability of nutrients.
A very common approach is the isolation and application of active microorganisms to
similar or the same plant and conditions, e.g., a Pseudomonas IACRBru1 strain isolated from
Eruca versicaria (rucola) tissues improved Lactuca sativa (lettuce) biomass (up to 30%) [92].
One of the critical steps for the successful application of microorganisms is their survival
and development in the new environment. In drought-stressed soils, the highest efficiency
of this inoculation could be achieved using drought-tolerant bacteria isolated from arid soils
or drought-resistant plants [93–95]. Bacteria classified as Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus altitudinis,
Brevibacillus laterosporus and Bacillus mojavensis were isolated from Cistanthe longiscapa, a
plant native to Atacama Desert in Chile [94]. A consortium of these microorganisms, with
various complementary properties such as phosphate solubilization, the ability to grow on
N-free culture, IAA, ACC-deaminase, and exopolysaccharide (EPS) synthesis, were applied
onto tomato seeds, improving seedlings growth under drought stress.

Table 1. Selected activities of beneficial bacteria under drought-stress conditions in horticultural plant species; H—higher
level/content; L—lower level/content; GPX—glutathione peroxidase; CAT—catalase; Chl—chlorophyll; RWC—relative
water content; Fv/Fm—quantum efficiency of photosystem II; SOD—superoxide dismutase; MDA—malondialdehyde.
Bacteria

Changes in Plants

Plants

Ref.

Bacillus pumilus

- H total biomass (to 34.9%)
- H antioxidant enzyme activities
- H flavonoids, polysaccharide and glycyrrhizic
acid contents

Glycyrrhiza
uralensis

[96]

Cucumis
sativus

[97]

- L GPX activity (to 12.5%)

Mentha pulegium

[98]

- H trehalose [11-fold vs. P. putida KT2440
(pUCP) without the gen]
- H fresh and dry weight
- H fully turgid weight
- H RWC

Capsicum
annuum cv. Maor

[23]

- L GPX activity (to 14.7%)
- H CAT activity (2.6-fold vs. control)

Mentha pulegium

[98]

Solanum
lycopresicum cv. Boludo F1

[99]

Solanum
esculentum cv. F144

[23]

Juglans regia

[100]

- H roots and shoots fresh and dry weight
- H shoot length

Bacillus sp.
Azotobacter chroococcum

Pseudomonas putida KT2440
(pUCP22:otsAB)

Azospirillum brasilense

- H shoot dry weight
- H net photosynthesis
- H relative Chl content
- L proline content

Variovorax paradoxus 5C-2

xeroprotectant effect of trehalose
in preventing the biomolecules

Rhodococcus sp. 4J2A2
Azotobacter chroococcum
with
Azospirilum lipofrum

- H fresh weight
- H root growth and length
- H total phenolics content in leaves
- H peroxidase activity

Azotobacter chroococcum
with
Azospirillum brasilense

- H RWC (from 64.6% to 72.1%)
- H Fv/Fm (from 0.56 to 0.75)
- H SOD activity (from 34.7% to 57.2%)
- L GPX activity (to 26.9%)

Mentha pulegium

[98]

- H fresh and dry weight
- H turgid weight
- H RWC
- H roots and stems length

Capsicum
annuum cv. Maor

[23]

Cucumis
sativus

[82]

Microbacterium sp. 3J1 or
Arthrobacter koreensis 5J12A or
Arthrobacter piechaudii 366-5
Bacillus cereus AR156 with
Bacillus subtilis SM21 with
Serratia sp. XY21

- H proline content in leaves
- L MDA content in leaves
- L peroxidation in plasmalemma

It is worth emphasizing that among the most frequently mentioned PGPR strains
of different genera, e.g., Pseudomonas, Bacillus, Klebsiella, Azotobacter, many Pseudomonas
species show a very high diversity of traits stimulating plant growth. For this reason,
many scientific laboratories are looking for such valuable isolates adapted to drought
conditions [101–103] (Table 1). Pseudomonas putida, isolated by Kumar et al. [101], synthetized IAA, siderophore, ACC-deaminase, formed biofilm and solubilized phosphate.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain, isolated from North East India, additionally showed HCN
synthesis and endogenous osmolyte accumulation under the drought condition [103].
Sandhya et al. [102] also selected drought-tolerant Pseudomonas spp.: P. monteilli, P. putida,
P. stutzeri, P. syringae from the rhizosphere of crop plants.
Niu et al. [93] isolated drought-tolerant plant growth-promoting bacteria from Setaria
italica (foxtail millet) cultivated in arid soils. The bacterial strains identified in the roots
and bulk soil (e.g., Pseudomonas fluorescens DR7 and DR11, Pseudomonas migulae DR35 and
Enterobacter hormaechei DR16) synthetized ACC-deaminase under drought conditions. All

the isolates produced EPS, but IAA activity was confirmed only in DR35 culture. Similarly,
Pseudomonas sp. isolated from Californian soil exposed to frequent drought also showed
significant production of EPS in response to desiccation [104].
Belonging to the PGPR family, Azospirillum spp. (Table 1) are a group of free-living
soil bacteria mainly known for their ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen but also for releasing phytohormones, enhancing root growth, water and mineral uptake and plant
resistance to drought stress [105,106] (Table 1). As a microbial inoculant, Azospirillum spp.
could be crucial to improve fruit-tree acclimatization when transferred to the post-vitro
environment [106].
Mariotti et al. [105] revealed that Azospirillum baldaniorum cells and their metabolites
promote Ocimum basilicum cv. Red Rubin (purple basil) growth under the water stress
condition. This action was attributed to the synthesis and transport of phytohormones
that promoted plant growth and conferred tolerance to the abiotic stress. The plant leaves
treated with a relevantly high dose of the filtered culture supernatants of A. baldaniorum
contained significantly higher concentration of chlorophyll a and b, total chlorophyll,
carotenoids, and anthocyanins. In the presence of these bacteria, in the tissues of purple
basil, the concentration of stress-related phytohormones, ABA, JA and SA were higher.
Azospirillum brasilence accompanied by Pseudomonas sp. and Bacillus lentus also caused a
higher level of chlorophyll content in Ocimum basilicum grown under drought stress [107].
Moreover, at the end of the growing season, certain soil species, including soil-borne
endophytic microorganisms promoting plant growth (e.g., including Bacillus, Clostridium
and Sporolactobacillus genera), form endospores capable of remaining dormant in the soil.
It is extremely important that in adverse environmental conditions (e.g., drought, very
high or low temperature or higher amounts of incoming solar radiation) [1,108,109], when
spores encounter the appropriate conditions (for example in the next growing season),
they survive, germinate and the vegetative cells develop in the soil and are able to inhabit
plants [109].
A mixture of three PGPR strains (Bacillus cereus AR156, Bacillus subtilis SM21, and
Serratia sp. XY21) (Table 1) stimulated IST in drought stress in cucumber plants by maintaining the root recovery intensity, reducing plasmalemma peroxidation, stabilizing the
osmotic potential, increasing photosynthesis efficiency and activities of SOD and cytoplasmic ascorbate peroxidase (APX) in the leaves, without involving the action of ACC
deaminase to the lower plant ethylene levels [83].
5.1. Bacillus Species in Drought Stress
Among the features of the soil-aerobic, rod-shaped cells of Bacillus species (Table 1)
contributing to the biocontrol mechanism is the synthesis and secretion of various antimicrobial peptides and very diverse antibiotics, enzymes, other proteins and organic
compounds [110,111]. Inoculation of Cucumis sativus (cucumber) with Bacillus cereus and
Bacillus subtilis strains along with Serratia sp. induced systemic tolerance to drought stress
in plants by maintaining photosynthetic efficiency, root vigor, increasing proline content
and enhanced SOD and CAT activities in the leaves [83]. In another experiment, to enhance
Lycopersicon esculentum (tomato) drought tolerance, Bacillus cereus AR156 supernatant was
applied. In the treated plants, chlorophyll a and b contents, as well as the activities of SOD,
POD and CAT were increased markedly after culture supernatant application [112].
Plant small heat shock proteins (sHSPs) act as molecular chaperones that prevent
irreversible aggregation of denatured proteins [85]. During drought stress, pepper plants
inoculated with Bacillus licheniformis K11 exhibited enhanced transcription of Cadhn, VA,
sHSP, and CaPR-10 genes [113,114]. In the study of Lim and Kim [113], the Capsicum
annuum (pepper) seedlings were treated with a Bacillus licheniformis strain originated from
Korean soil. Plants inoculated with drought-tolerant bacteria achieved higher shoot length
and dry weight, and the analysis of gene expression in pepper roots indicated higher levels
of expression of four genes related to drought and cold stresses. Bacillus sp. selected for
high levels of cytokine synthesis was introduced into 12-day old L. sativa grown in dry soil.

After 3 weeks of seedlings inoculation, the increased amount of cytokinin and higher fresh
and dry weights of shoots were confirmed [115].
At the beginning of vegetative season, higher temperature induces microbial metabolism
(including releasing of inorganic available P to the soil solution by phosphate solubilizing
microorganisms (PSM)) [116]. Gradually, the lack of adequate precipitation, insufficient
soil moisture and high temperature decreased the soil microbial activity and the movement
of nutrients in the soil [62]. Bacillus strains are commonly known to be great phosphate
solubilizers [110]. Ying et al. [18] revealed high phosphatase activity of Bacillus megatherium
and inorganic phosphate solubilization of Bacillus saryghattati strains under drought stress.
Bacillus spp. (B. cultidtuctinus, B. subtilis, B. polymyxa and B. mojavensis) isolated from
the Cistanthe longiscapa rhizosphere grown in the Atacama Desert (Chile) also exhibited
phosphate-solubilizing activity [94].
It is worth noting that the activity of phosphate-solubilizing Bacillus strains support
very energy-consuming processes of nitrogen fixation. Available P is a crucial ingredient of
the energy source ATP. It can also replace conventional fertilization. An effective action on N
and P uptake by the Vicia faba (faba bean) seeds and straws was confirmed after inoculation
with the well-known phosphate-solubilizing bacterium Bacillus megatherium [117]. After
inoculation of the apple trees cv. ‘Topaz’ with ‘Mycostat’ (containing Bacillus subtilis among
strains promoting plant growth) the P root content was the same as in the tissues treated
with chemical NPK fertilizer [89]. In addition, when soil moisture declined, the limited
diffusion rate of nutrients, particularly P, from the soil matrix into the absorbing surface
negatively affected nodulation and biological nitrogen fixation [118].
Plants with symptoms of potassium deficiency show accelerated wilting and lower
yield, causing the loss of control of turgor-driven leaf movements [119]. Bacillus strains can
secrete acidic metabolites (e.g., oxalic, fumaric, lemon, tartaric acids) that dissolve various
minerals. Avakyan [120] demonstrated the ability to produce a thick EPS envelope by the
strain Bacillus mucilaginosus. Secretion of the acidic metabolites by B. mucilaginosus cells
creates a zone of strong acidification at the soil minerals’ surface and allows the dissolution
of mineral compounds. The polysaccharides secreted by these microorganisms additionally
strongly adsorb SiO3 −2 leaving bioavailable K cations for plants in the soil solution [121].
The plant root is involved in the perception and transduction of stress signals via
phytoregulators such as ET [122]. The increased level of ET causes premature aging
of fruits and vegetables; wilting of flowers and leafy vegetables and defoliation of the
mature leaves. Additionally, higher concentrations of ET in the rhizosphere inhibits
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi colonization and the root nodulation of legumes. A Bacillus
subtilis (LDR2) strain isolated from the rhizosphere of drought-stressed plants, synthetizes
ACC deaminase-regulating ET concentration. In the experiment, a LDR2 strain revealed
protective mechanisms against the low water availability in soil, and improved Trigonella
plants’ weights (by 56%). Barnawall et al. [122] also demonstrated the enhanced nodulation
and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi colonization in the plants, which caused better nutrient
uptake after inoculation of plants with B. subtilis.
In the face of climate change, certain future adaptations can be predicted by observing
the functioning of organisms in extreme environments. In addition, in natural adverse
ecosystems, except for the ability to form spores, microorganisms support plant growth
and simultaneously provide an optimal environment for the development of plants tissues [111,117,123], e.g., Bacillus mojavensis was isolated from the very extreme environment
of the Mojave Desert in California [111]. All the strains belonging to this group are described as endophytic and antagonistic to fungi [124]. The endophytic microorganisms
(including both obligate and facultative species) are microbial symbionts residing within
plants, mostly influencing host physiology [36,111].
The B. mojavensis strain isolated from the soybean plant rhizosphere was a very antagonistic strain, effectively controlling Rhizoctonia solani, a pathogenic fungus causing huge
harvest losses of horticultural crops [125,126]. The presence of endophytic microorganisms
with the biocontrol actions of soil-borne pathogens and the ability to stimulate the growth

of cultivated plants from the early stages of its development seems to be a crucial solution
for plants under unfavorable climate conditions. The inoculation of soybean seeds with the
Bacillus mojavensis PB 35(R11) strain enhanced the growth of plant inoculated with R. solani
(about 30% higher plant fresh weight and over 100% higher plant dry weight) [111]. Moreover, quantitative assays of the PB-35(R11) strain showed HCN, ammonia and siderophore
production, as well as phosphate solubilization and chitinase activity. The treatment of
seeds gives several advantages for the control of pathogenic fungi as a promising alternative to the use of synthetic pesticides. The endophytic Bacillus inoculants are also known
for controlling Fusarium species, especially Fusarium verticillioides [124,127].
5.2. Actinomycetes Species in Drought Stress
A more advantageous strategy is the selection of microorganisms adapted to functioning in the conditions of temporary lack of water, drought, or rapid changes in temperature,
because the metabolically active forms of microorganisms may support the growth of
sensitive horticultural crops. Actinomycetes are Gram-positive, mostly aerobic, saprotrophic
bacteria of diverse phenotypes (from cocci to highly differentiated mycelia).
Tangles of filaments grow similarly to filamentous fungi. This pseudomycelial growth
(surface, plunge or air) provides penetration of a larger soil volume and into pores of
soil, easing access to valuable minerals and simultaneously making them available to
plants [128].
The main place of Actinomycetes occurrence is the soil (warm and humid or dry), but
they are also identified in desert sands, on leaves and in plant tissues [129]. Reproduction
of these bacteria occurs by fragmentation of pseudomycelium and spore formation. This
group of microorganisms are mostly chemoorganotrophs with the ability to break down
difficult decomposing substrates, e.g., cellulose, chitin, steroids, higher fatty acids or
aromatic compounds. These activities allow them to survive and outcompete the native
microflora in various ecological niches [130]. Lawlor et al. [131] revealed a higher number
of Actinomycetes colony forming units (CFU) (about 106 to 107 g−1 of dry weight of soil)
than CFU of fungi (104 to 105 g−1 of dry weight of soil).
Actinomycetes are known to be producers of bioactive compounds (antibacterial, antifungal), exhibiting great potential in promoting plant growth [129]. Sousa et al. [3]
investigated that the Streptomyces strains produce siderophores, phytohormones (IAA),
and solubilizing phosphate compounds, and exhibit chitinase, xylanase, cellulase, amylase
and lipase activities. Additionally, the number of plant growth-promoting Actinobacteria is
1.3 times higher than that of the other bacteria [132].
Khamna et al. [133] identified about 30 Streptomyces isolates in Thai soil samples
collected from the rhizospheres of plants such as Curcuma magga, Zingiber officinale (ginger),
Ocimum sanctum (holy basil), and Cumbopogon citratus (lemongrass). After 3-day incubation, the Streptomyces CMU-H009 strain synthetized the highest concentration of IAA
(about 144 µg · mL−1 ) and its culture filtrates stimulated Vigna unguiculata (cowpea) seed
germination. El-Tarabily [134] isolated over 60 Streptomyces spp. strains from a tomato
rhizosphere in the United Arab Emirates and some of them revealed ACC-deaminase and
IAA synthesis. The most efficient Streptomyces filipinensis 15, Streptomyces atrovirens 26 and
Streptomyces albovinaceus 41 strains increased Lycopersicon esculentum (tomato) root and
shoot length and dry weight. A higher level of endogenous IAA in the roots and shoots in
these plants was also confirmed. Actinomycetes exhibited great potential in promoting rice,
sorghum [135], tomato [134], maize [136] and soybean seedling growth [137].
It is worth emphasizing that some Actinomycetes (e.g., Frankia sp.) function in a
symbiosis with higher plants, fixing nitrogen, while the plant provides the bacteria with
sugars and minerals [136]. Such a favorable relationship has been observed in soybeans,
peas, Elaeagnus umbellata and Eleangus angustifolia (Russian olive) [138].
A variety of activities improving plant development have been indicated in the Acitnomycetes species, and their efficiency obtained by adapting to adverse climatic conditions
enables them to receive commercial products containing PGPA (plant growth-promoting

actinobacteria), such as Streptomyces lydicus strains. Acitnomycetes species (Streptomyces
kasugaensis, Streptomyces griseus and Streptomyces cacoi var. asoensis) producing antibacterial
and antifungal bioactive compounds are components of biocontrol products applied against
plant pathogens [129]. Actinomycetes synthesize enzymes such as lysozyme, glucanases,
peptide–peptide hydrolases, mannanase and chitinase, which are involved in the lysis of
the cell walls of other microorganisms [128]. El Tarabily et al. [134] investigated the promotion and biological control of seedlings and the mature plants of C. sativus using endophytic
Actinomycetes (Actinoplanes campanulatus, Micromonospora chalcea and Streptomyces spiralis).
Pythium aphanidermatum (oospore-producing soil-borne pathogen) causes seedling and root
diseases of cucumber, causing damage to horticultural crops. This experiment proved that
Actinomycetes colonize the roots of inoculated plants, promoted their growth and reduced
the impact of P. aphanidermatum. Furthermore, El Tarabily et al. [134] compared the impact
of Actinomycetes with chemical fungicide (metalaxyl) and demonstrated the possibility of
replacing fungicide with plant inoculation with endophytic Actinomycetes.
6. Plant Growth-Promoting Fungi in Horticultural Crops
Among microorganisms, fungi can be much more drought-tolerant than bacteria [139]
due to a number of mechanisms to overcome drought stress, including osmolytes, thick
cell walls, and melanin [140]. Yeast cells are encased in a protective cell wall and cells of
filamentous fungi can be connected, allowing water and solutes to flow between them. The
filamentous fungi produce extremally long hypha, enabling the extraction of water from
remote sites in the soil. Fungal abundance in the soil can increase under drought. They can
remain active and even grow under extremely dry conditions. Their resistance to drought
allows them to conduct the basic processes of decomposition of polymer compounds and
the circulation of C and N [139]. Fungi, bacteria, seaweeds and plants are able to accumulate osmoprotectants, for instance amino acids (e.g., proline, glutamate), carbohydrates
(trehalose), sugar alcohols (inositol, mannitol), quaternary ammonium compounds (glycine
betaine) and tertiary sulphonium compounds (e.g., dimethylsulphoniopropionate) [141].
Plants use various mechanisms to protect against water deficiency, but some of them
are associated with the presence of fungi with special activities (Table 2). Eukaryotic plant
endophytes belong mainly to the fungi kingdom [142,143] and the most numerous among
these endophytes are Glomeromycota (40%), Ascomycota (31%), Basidiomycota (20%),
Zygomycota (0.1%) and unidentified phylla (8%). The Glomeromycota phyllum includes
only arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), whose species protect against phytopathogens,
promote plant growth and counteract diverse stresses (mainly drought and salinity) by
activating stress responsive/induced genes in plants. AMF are able to create a symbiosis
with many horticultural plants belonging to various families, e.g., Alliaceae, Apiaceae,
Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Solanaceae, Rosaceae, and Oleaceae [144–146]. Arbuscular mycorrhiza
(AM) is the endomycorrhizal symbiotic association improving the nutrient uptake and
growth of plants which may protect the host plants from pathogens and the harmful effects
of drought [144,146,147]. Interactions with AMF, through an extensive network of hyphae,
supply the plant with water from distant places. Studies have shown that AMF mainly
use plant-derived carbohydrates in symbiosis with plants, and the plant receives access to
the bioavailable minerals absorbed by the fungus from the soil (especially phosphorus).
Moreover, the hyphae of fungal strains can uptake phosphorus and ammonium ions much
more efficiently than the plant roots [148].
Moreover, fungi may influence the hormonal balance of plants by producing phytohormones (auxins, gibberellins) and through tolerance and resistance pathways, which protect
the plant against biotic and abiotic factors. Both ectomycorrhizal (EMF, e.g., Laccaria spp.)and endomycorrhizal-AMF fungi (e.g., belonging to the Glomus, Rhizophagus, Funneliformis
genera) are capable of inducing the ISR resistance pathways involving JA as a signaling substance, or SAR, in which signaling occurs thanks to the SA molecules [149]. The production
of auxins by the fungal endophytes increases the growth of plants under stress [150]. After
the plant under stress is colonized by endophytes, stress-induced levels of ABA and some

genes’ expressions (e.g., zeaxanthin epoxidase, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase 3 and
ABA aldehyde oxidase 3) were decreased. Similar effects were achieved in the promotion of
plant growth and yield under stress conditions, after exogenous phytohormone application
such as gibberellic acid [151]. Sometimes endophytes do not have positive effects on plant
growth during drought, but they improve plant recovery after water shortage [152].
The presence of some fungal endophytes (e.g., in the Nicotiana benthamiana seedlings)
increased the leaf area, chlorophyll content, photosynthetic rate, antioxidative enzyme
activities, accumulation of osmoprotectants (sugar, protein and proline) and enhanced
expression of drought-related genes [153,154]. On the other hand, in drought conditions,
the relative water content in leaves and soluble protein content in the tissues of Cinnamomum
migao did not change after 120-day inoculation with Glomus lamellosum [155] (Table 2).
In drought-suffering plants, after endophyte inoculation, a lower level of biomolecule
degradation was observed as a consequence of the reduced level of ROS production, e.g.,
in tomato [156]. In the face of drought stress, inoculation with Piriformospora indica (Table 2)
mobilized activities of peroxidase (POX), catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD)
in the leaves [157]. The endophytic fungal strains of Ampelomyces sp. isolated from soil
exposed to drought enhanced drought tolerance in tomato [143,158]. Inoculation of tomato
seedlings with Alternaria spp. strains under drought conditions resulted in the maintenance
of the photosynthetic efficiency and effective reduction of ROS accumulation [156].
Table 2. Selected activities of beneficial fungi under drought stress conditions in horticultural plant species; H—higher
level/content; L—lower level/content; Chl—chlorophyll; CAT—catalase; SOD—superoxide dismutase; MDA—malondialdehyde.
Fungi

Glomus intraradices

Glomus mosesseae

Changes in Plants
- H content of N in roots and shoots
- H flower and fruit production
- H fruit yield
- H dry root mass
- slow down the reduction of Chl a+b
- inhibit the decomposition of carotenoids

Plants

Ref.

Lycopersicum
esculentum

[159]

Fragaria x
ananassa

[32]

Glomus etunicatum

- H fresh weight
- H number of leaves
- H content of N, P, Zn in leaves

Juglans regia

[100]

Ampelomyces sp.

- H dry weight of root and shoot
- H fruit weight
- H stress tolerance

Solanum
lycopersicum
var. Better Boy

[158]

Pinus
tablaeformis

[160]

Brassica rapa subsp. pekinensis

[157]

Theobroma cacao

[160]

Juglans regia

[100]

Cinnamomum migao

[155]

Phoma spp.

Piriformospora indica

Trichodermaharzianum

- H proline content, CAT and SOD activities
- H chlorophyll content
- H MDA content
- H water content in leaves
- H root and shoot growth
- H lateral root development
- H peroxidase, CAT and SOD activities in leaves
- H fresh and dry weight of roots
- H osmolyte concentration

Glomus mossae
with
Glomus etunicatum

- H height
- H content of N, P, Zn in leaves
- L leaves abscission

Glomus lamellosum
or
Glomus etunicatum

- H fresh and dry weight
- H stem fresh weight
- H water content in leaves
- L MDA content
- H CAT activity

Horticulturae 2021, 7, 390

14 of 21

Table 2. Cont.
Fungi
Glomus mosseae or
G. versiforme or
G. diaphanum

Changes in Plants
- H enzyme activity in soil
- L CAT activity in soil
- H hyphal density

Chaetomium globosum
or
Penicillium resedanum

- H shoot dry weight
- H shoot length
- H photosynthesis rate

Alternaria sp.
or
Trichoderma harzianum

- H root and shoot dry weight

Plants

Ref.

Poncirus
trifoliata

[161]

Capsicum annum

[151]

Solanum
lycopersicum
var. Rutger

[156]

The presence of beneficial fungal strains in soil and plants might specifically induce
resistance by releasing elicitors belonging to fungal-derived compounds, e.g.: chitin, chitosan, ergosterol, β-glucans [151]. Moreover, among the pathogenic microorganisms, the
filamentous fungi are responsible for horticultural crop diseases. It should be also noted
that fungal endophytes belonging to PGP (e.g., Colletotrichum sp., Alternaria sp., Fusarium
sp. and Aspergillus sp.) induce plant resistance and increase plant tolerance to drought, but
may also produce mycotoxins in plants [162]. To increase specificity and enhancement of
the induction, elicitors can be derived from the nonpathogenic fungi belonging to the same
genus as the pathogenic strains causing plant diseases, e.g., Fusarium or Trichoderma [152].
In grapevine with black-foot disease (Dactylonectria and Cylindrocarpon genera), the relative
abundance of the potential biocontrol agent Trichoderma in the root endosphere, rhizosphere,
and bulk soil under drought stress (25% irrigation regime) was significantly lower than
in control conditions (50–100% irrigation regime) [163]. Moreover, enrichment in AMF
Funneliformis during drought was observed.
Recent and particularly promising studies have focused on the determination of the
effectiveness and reliability of a mixture of bacterial and fungal strains (Table 3).
Table 3. Selected activities of beneficial consortia (bacteria with fungi) under drought stress conditions in horticultural plant
species; H—higher level/content; L—lower level/content; CAT—catalase; APX—ascorbate peroxidase; Chl—chlorophyll.
Bacteria with Fungi
Pseudomonas fluorescence
with
Trichoderma harzianum

Variovorax paradoxus 5C-2
with
Rhizophorus irregularis MULC

Changes in Plants
- H growth parameters
- H seedling emergency
- H root and shoot length
- H CAT and APX activities
- H shoot dry weight
- H net photosynthesis
- no change: relative Chl content vs. control
- H oxidative damage
- L proline content

Plants

Ref.

Cuminum cyminum

[164]

Solanum
lycopersicum cv. Boludo F1

[99]

7. Conclusions
The EGD emphasizes sustainable food production by the crucial reduction in the use
of pesticides, biocides and chemical mineral fertilizers and increase of organic (ecological)
production. Consequently, in many European countries, continuous research has been
carried out on natural biopreparations (biocontroling, biofertilizers) containing selected
microorganisms with different activities, and/or their metabolites.
The key problems of using biopreparations containing various microorganisms include
limiting the possibility of introducing the microbial inoculum to the appropriate conditions
and the low repeatability of their activities. This might be due to drought stress during the
vegetative period in comparison to microorganisms tested in the optimal conditions.

The resistance of plants that interact with microorganisms in drought conditions is
enhanced because it is induced by both abiotic (stress factor) and the biotic (microorganism)
elicitors. In drought conditions, many cultivated horticultural plants use their own numerous mechanisms (morphological, physiological, anatomical, biochemical or molecular) to
counteract the negative effects and are supported by endophytes that constantly inhabit
them, and rhizospheric microorganisms existing in the vicinity of roots.
The use of preparations containing fungal strains, which are more tolerant to drought
than bacteria, provides many tolerance mechanisms, and their abundance increases in
water-limiting conditions. Fungi, through their specific growth and traits, allow intensive
soil exploration, water extraction and penetration of plant tissues influencing the plant and
might be more effective compared to bacteria with the same activity.
Studies on the influence of drought stress on horticultural plants have indicated that
the application of various microorganisms allows efficient protection of plants, despite our
restricted knowledge about these mechanisms of action. Due to such a high variability of the
environment, biopreparations should be multicomponent in order to achieve appropriate
levels of microorganism cooperation and the final desired effect. The combination of fungal
and bacterial strains into one preparation gives even better effectiveness and reliability,
allowing us to consider higher crop-specificity, and seems to be particularly promising.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.H.; E.O. and J.J.-Ś.; writing—original draft preparation,
E.O.; A.H.; E.R. and J.J.-Ś.; writing—review and editing, A.H.; E.O.; E.R. and M.S.; visualization, A.H.;
E.O.; E.R. and M.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Moretti, C.L.; Mattos, L.M.; Calbo, A.G.; Sargent, S.A. Climate changes and potential impacts on postharvest quality of fruit and
vegetable crops: A review. Food Res. Int. 2010, 43, 1824–1832. [CrossRef]
Hamid, B.; Zaman, M.; Farooq, S.; Fatima, S.; Sayyed, R.Z.; Baba, Z.A.; Sheikh, T.A.; Reddy, M.S.; El Enshasy, H.; Gafur, A.; et al.
Bacterial plant biostimulants: A sustainable way towards improving growth, productivity, and health of crops. Sustainability
2021, 13, 2856. [CrossRef]
Sousa, C.S.; Soares, A.C.F.; Garrido, M.S. Characterization of Streptomycetes with potential to promote plant growth and biocontrol.
Sci. Agric. 2008, 65, 50–55. [CrossRef]
Shah, A.; Nazari, M.; Antar, M.; Msimbira, L.A.; Naamala, J.; Lyu, D.; Rabileh, M.; Zajonc, J.; Smith, D.L. PGPR in agriculture:
A sustainable approach to increasing climate change resilience. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 2021, 5, 1–22. [CrossRef]
International Society for Horticultural Science. Available online: https://www.ishs.org/defining-horticulture (accessed on
27 September 2021).
Vishwakarma, K.; Kumar, N.; Shandilya, C.; Mohapatra, S.; Bhayana, S.; Varma, A. Revisiting plant-microbe interactions and
microbial consortia application for enhancing sustainable agriculture: A review. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 560406. [CrossRef]
Khan, N.; Ali, S.; Shahid, M.A.; Mustafa, A.; Sayyed, R.Z.; Curá, J.A. Insights into the interactions among roots, rhizosphere, and
rhizobacteria for improving plant growth and tolerance to abiotic stresses: A review. Cells 2021, 10, 1551. [CrossRef]
Ullah, A.; Nisar, M.; Ali, H.; Hazrat, A.; Hayat, K.; Keerio, A.A.; Ihsan, M.; Laiq, M.; Ullah, S.; Fahad, S.; et al. Drought tolerance
improvement in plants: An endophytic bacterial approach. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 7385–7397. [CrossRef]
Yan, L.; Zhu, J.; Zhao, X.; Shi, J.; Jiang, C.; Shao, D. Beneficial effects of endophytic fungi colonization on plants. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 3327–3340. [CrossRef]
Cheng, Y.T.; Zhang, L.; He, S.Y. Plant-microbe interactions facing environmental challenge. Cell Host Microbe 2019, 26, 183–192.
[CrossRef]
Kavadia, A.; Omirou, M.; Fasoula, D.; Ioannides, I.M. The importance of microbial inoculants in a climate-changing agriculture in
Eastern Mediterranean region. Atmosphere 2020, 11, 1136. [CrossRef]
Malik, A.; Mor, V.S.; Tokas, J.; Punia, H.; Malik, S.; Malik, K.; Sangwan, S.; Tomar, S.; Singh, P.; Singh, N.; et al. Biostimulant-treated
seedlings under sustainable agriculture: A global perspective facing climate change. Agronomy 2021, 11, 14. [CrossRef]
Porter, S.S.; Bantay, R.; Friel, C.A.; Garoutte, A.; Gdanetz, K.; Ibarreta, K.; Moore, B.M.; Shetty, P.; Siler, E.; Friesen, M.L. Beneficial
microbes ameliorate abiotic and biotic sources of stress on plants. Funct. Ecol. 2020, 34, 2075–2086. [CrossRef]

14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.
40.

41.

Fincheira, P.; Quiroz, A.; Tortella, G.; Diez, M.C.; Rubilar, O. Current advances in plant-microbe communication via volatile
organic compounds as an innovative strategy to improve plant growth. Microbiol. Res. 2021, 247, 126726. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Hanaka, A.; Ozimek, E.; Majewska, M.; Rysiak, A.; Jaroszuk-Ściseł, J. Physiological diversity of Spitsbergen soil microbial
communities suggests their potential as plant growth-promoting bacteria. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 1207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Hanaka, A.; Nowak, A.; Plak, A.; Dresler, S.; Ozimek, E.; Jaroszuk-Ściseł, J.; Wójciak-Kosior, M.; Sowa, I. Bacterial isolate
inhabiting Spitsbergen soil modifies the physiological response of Phaseolus coccineus in control conditions and under exogenous
application of methyl jasmonate and copper excess. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 1909. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Compant, S.; Van Der Heijden, M.G.A.; Sessitsch, A. Climate change effects on beneficial plant-microorganism interactions. FEMS
Microbiol. Ecol. 2010, 73, 197–214. [CrossRef]
Ma, Y.; Vosátka, M.; Freitas, H. Editorial: Beneficial microbes alleviate climatic stresses in plants. Front. Plant Sci. 2019, 10, 595.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Vimal, S.R.; Singh, J.S.; Arora, N.K.; Singh, S. Soil-plant-microbe interactions in stressed agriculture management: A review.
Pedosphere 2017, 27, 177–192. [CrossRef]
Gupta, S.; Seth, R.; Sharma, A. Plant Growth-Promoting Rhizobacteria Play a Role as Phytostimulators for Sustainable Agriculture;
Choudhary, D., Varma, A., Tuteja, N., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2016.
Ma, Y.; Oliveira, R.S.; Freitas, H.; Zhang, C. Biochemical and molecular mechanisms of plant-microbe-metal interactions:
Relevance for phytoremediation. Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 918. [CrossRef]
Pirttilä, A.M.; Tabas, H.M.P.; Baruah, N.; Koskimäki, J.J. Biofertilizers and biocontrol agents for agriculture: How to identify and
develop new potent microbial strains and traits. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 817. [CrossRef]
Vílchez, J.I.; García-Fontana, C.; Román-Naranjo, D.; González-López, J.; Manzanera, M. Plant drought tolerance enhancement by
trehalose production of desiccation-tolerant microorganisms. Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 1577. [CrossRef]
Finkel, O.M.; Castrillo, G.; Herrera Paredes, S.; Salas González, I.; Dangl, J.L. Understanding and exploiting plant beneficial
microbes. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2017, 38, 155–163. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Meena, K.K.; Sorty, A.M.; Bitla, U.M.; Choudhary, K.; Gupta, P.; Pareek, A.; Singh, D.P.; Prabha, R.; Sahu, P.K.; Gupta, V.K.; et al.
Abiotic stress responses and microbe-mediated mitigation in plants: The omics strategies. Front. Plant Sci. 2017, 8, 172. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Anjum, S.A.; Ashraf, U.; Zohaib, A.; Tanveer, M.; Naeem, M.; Ali, I.; Tabassum, T.; Nazir, U. Growth and developmental responses
of crop plants under drought stress: A review. Zemdirb. Agric. 2017, 104, 267–276. [CrossRef]
Sharma, M.; Sudheer, S.; Usmani, Z.; Rani, R.; Gupta, P. Deciphering the omics of plant-microbe interaction: Perspectives and
new insights. Curr. Genom. 2020, 21, 343–362. [CrossRef]
Vasseur-Coronado, M.; du Boulois, H.D.; Pertot, I.; Puopolo, G. Selection of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria sharing suitable
features to be commercially developed as biostimulant products. Microbiol. Res. 2021, 245, 1–10. [CrossRef]
Pylak, M.; Oszust, K.; Frac,
˛ M. Review report on the role of bioproducts, biopreparations, biostimulants and microbial inoculants
in organic production of fruit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 2019, 18, 597–616. [CrossRef]
Kränzlein, M.; Geilfus, C.-M.; Franzisky, B.L.; Zhang, X.; Wimmer, M.A.; Zörb, C. Physiological responses of contrasting maize
(Zea mays L.) hybrids to repeated drought. J. Plant Growth Regul. 2021. [CrossRef]
Jamil, M.; Ahamd, M.; Anwar, F.; Zahir, Z.A.; Kharal, M.A.; Nazli, F. Inducing drought tolerance in wheat through combined use
of L-tryptophan and Pseudomonas fluorescens. Pak. J. Agric. Sci. 2018, 55, 331–337. [CrossRef]
Yin, B.; Wang, Y.; Liu, P.; Hu, J.; Zhen, W. Effects of vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhiza on the protective system in strawberry leaves
under drought stress. Front. Agric. China 2010, 4, 165–169. [CrossRef]
Hone, H.; Mann, R.; Yang, G.; Kaur, J.; Tannenbaum, I.; Li, T.; Spangenberg, G.; Sawbridge, T. Profiling, isolation and characterisation of beneficial microbes from the seed microbiomes of drought tolerant wheat. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 11916. [CrossRef]
Zapata, T.; Galindo, D.M.; Corrales-Ducuara, A.R.; Ocampo-Ibáñez, I.D. The diversity of culture-dependent gram-negative
Rhizobacteria associated with manihot esculenta crantz plants subjected to water-deficit stress. Diversity 2021, 13, 366. [CrossRef]
Mustafa, S.; Kabir, S.; Shabbir, U.; Batool, R. Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria in sustainable agriculture: From theoretical to
pragmatic approach. Symbiosis 2019, 78, 115–123. [CrossRef]
Ozimek, E.; Hanaka, A. Mortierella species as the plant growth-promoting fungi present in the agricultural soils. Agriculture 2021,
11, 7. [CrossRef]
IPCC Climate Change. The Physical Science Basis 2021; IPCC Climate Change: Geneva, Switzerland, 2021.
Lelieveld, J.; Hadjinicolaou, P.; Kostopoulou, E.; Chenoweth, J.; El Maayar, M.; Giannakopoulos, C.; Hannides, C.; Lange, M.A.;
Tanarhte, M.; Tyrlis, E.; et al. Climate change and impacts in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East. Clim. Chang. 2012,
114, 667–687. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ilyas, M.; Nisar, M.; Khan, N.; Hazrat, A.; Khan, A.H.; Hayat, K.; Fahad, S.; Khan, A.; Ullah, A. Drought tolerance strategies in
plants: A mechanistic approach. J. Plant Growth Regul. 2021, 40, 926–944. [CrossRef]
Hanaka, A.; Plak, A.; Zagórski, P.; Ozimek, E.; Rysiak, A.; Majewska, M.; Jaroszuk-Ściseł, J. Relationships between the properties
of Spitsbergen soil, number and biodiversity of rhizosphere microorganisms, and heavy metal concentration in selected plant
species. Plant Soil 2019, 436, 49–69. [CrossRef]
M˛edrek, K.; Gluza, A.; Siwek, K.; Zagórski, P. The meteorological conditions on the Calypsobyen in summer 2014 on the
background of multiyear 1986–2011. Probl. Klim. Polar. 2014, 24, 37–50. (In Polish)

42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

48.
49.

50.
51.
52.

53.
54.
55.
56.

57.

58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

65.
66.

67.

Franczak, Ł.; Kociuba, W.; Gajek, G. Runoff variability in the Scott River (SW Spitsbergen) in summer seasons 2012–2013 in
comparison with the period 1986–2009. QuaGeo 2016, 35, 39–50. [CrossRef]
Hu, Y.; Xie, G.; Jiang, X.; Shao, K.; Tang, X.; Gao, G. The relationships between the free-living and particle-attached bacterial
communities in response to elevated eutrophication. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 423. [CrossRef]
Schimel, J.P. Life in dry soils: Effects of drought on soil microbial communities and processes. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 2018,
49, 409–432. [CrossRef]
Manzanera, M. Dealing with water stress and microbial preservation. Environ. Microbiol. 2021, 23, 3351–3359. [CrossRef]
Brás, T.A.; Seixas, J.; Carvalhais, N.; Jagermeyr, J. Severity of drought and heatwave crop losses tripled over the last five decades
in Europe. Environ. Res. Lett. 2021, 16, 065012. [CrossRef]
Singh, R.; Parihar, P.; Singh, M.; Bajguz, A.; Kumar, J.; Singh, S.; Singh, V.P.; Prasad, S.M. Uncovering potential applications of
cyanobacteria and algal metabolites in biology, agriculture and medicine: Current status and future prospects. Front. Microbiol.
2017, 8, 515. [CrossRef]
Camaille, M.; Fabre, N.; Clément, C.; Barka, E.A. Advances in wheat physiology in response to drought and the role of plant
growth promoting rhizobacteria to trigger drought tolerance. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 687. [CrossRef]
Rysiak, A.; Dresler, S.; Hanaka, A.; Hawrylak-Nowak, B.; Strzemski, M.; Kováčik, J.; Sowa, I.; Latalski, M.; Wójciak, M. High
temperature alters secondary metabolites and photosynthetic efficiency in Heracleum sosnowskyi. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 4756.
[CrossRef]
Abdelaal, K.; Alkahtani, M.; Attia, K.; Hafez, Y.; Király, L.; Künstler, A. The role of plant growth-promoting bacteria in alleviating
the adverse effects of drought on plants. Biology 2021, 10, 520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fang, Y.; Xiong, L. General mechanisms of drought response and their application in drought resistance improvement in plants.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2015, 72, 673–689. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Luo, W.; Xu, C.; Ma, W.; Yue, X.; Liang, X.; Zuo, X.; Knapp, A.K.; Smith, M.D.; Sardans, J.; Dijkstra, F.A.; et al. Effects of extreme
drought on plant nutrient uptake and resorption in rhizomatous vs bunchgrass-dominated grasslands. Oecologia 2018, 188,
633–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Manavalan, L.P.; Guttikonda, S.K.; Phan Tran, L.S.; Nguyen, H.T. Physiological and molecular approaches to improve drought
resistance in soybean. Plant Cell Physiol. 2009, 50, 1260–1276. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shao, H.B.; Chu, L.Y.; Jaleel, C.A.; Zhao, C.X. Water-deficit stress-induced anatomical changes in higher plants. Comptes Rendus
Biol. 2008, 331, 215–225. [CrossRef]
Reddy, A.R.; Chaitanya, K.V.; Vivekanandan, M. Drought-induced responses of photosynthesis and antioxidant metabolism in
higher plants. J. Plant Physiol. 2004, 161, 1189–1202. [CrossRef]
Abdelaal, K.A.A.; Hafez, Y.M.; El-Afry, M.M.; Tantawy, D.S.; Alshaal, T. Effect of some osmoregulators on photosynthesis, lipid
peroxidation, antioxidative capacity, and productivity of barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) under water deficit stress. Environ. Sci.
Pollut. Res. 2018, 25, 30199–30211. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Hafez, Y.; Attia, K.; Alamery, S.; Ghazy, A.; Al-Doss, A.; Ibrahim, E.; Rashwan, E.; El-Maghraby, L.; Awad, A.; Abdelaal, K.
Beneficial effects of biochar and chitosan on antioxidative capacity, osmolytes accumulation, and anatomical characters of
water-stressed barley plants. Agronomy 2020, 10, 630. [CrossRef]
Hargravei, K.R.; Kolb, K.J.; Ewers, F.W.; Davis, S.D. Conduit diameter and drought-induced embolism in Salvia mellifera Greene
(Labiatae). New Phytol. 1994, 126, 695–705. [CrossRef]
Liu, F.; Jensen, C.R.; Shahanzari, A.; Andersen, M.N.; Jacobsen, S.E. ABA regulated stomatal control and photosynthetic water
use efficiency of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) during progressive soil drying. Plant Sci. 2005, 168, 831–836. [CrossRef]
Ullah, A.; Mushtaq, H.; Fahad, S.; Hakim; Shah, A.; Chaudhary, H.J. Plant growth promoting potential of bacterial endophytes in
novel association with Olea ferruginea and Withania coagulans. Microbiology 2017, 86, 119–127. [CrossRef]
Hussain, H.A.; Hussain, S.; Khaliq, A.; Ashraf, U.; Anjum, S.A.; Men, S.; Wang, L. Chilling and drought stresses in crop plants:
Implications, cross talk, and potential management opportunities. Front. Plant Sci. 2018, 9, 393. [CrossRef]
Ragel, P.; Raddatz, N.; Leidi, E.O.; Quintero, F.J.; Pardo, J.M. Regulation of K+ nutrition in plants. Front. Plant Sci. 2019, 10, 281.
[CrossRef]
Wang, Z.; Li, G.; Sun, H.; Ma, L.; Guo, Y.; Zhao, Z.; Gao, H.; Mei, L. Effects of drought stress on photosynthesis and photosynthetic
electron transport chain in young apple tree leaves. Biol. Open 2018, 7. [CrossRef]
Zhang, Y.B.; Yang, S.L.; Dao, J.M.; Deng, J.; Shahzad, A.N.; Fan, X.; Li, R.D.; Quan, Y.J.; Bukhari, S.A.H.; Zeng, Z.H. Droughtinduced alterations in photosynthetic, ultrastructural and biochemical traits of contrasting sugarcane genotypes. PLoS ONE 2020,
15, e0235845. [CrossRef]
Cruz de Calvadio, M.H. Drought stress and reactive oxygen species. Plant Signal. Behav. 2008, 3, 156–165. [CrossRef]
Verma, G.; Srivastava, D.; Tiwari, P.; Chakrabarty, D. Reactive oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur species in plants: Production,
metabolism, signaling and defense mechanisms. ROS modulation in crop plants under drought stress. In Reactive Oxygen,
Nitrogen and Sulfur Species in Plants: Production, Metabolism, Signaling and Defense Mechanisms; Hasanuzzaman, M., Fotopoulos, V.,
Nahar, K., Fujita, M., Eds.; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2019; pp. 311–336.
Petrov, V.; Hille, J.; Mueller-Roeber, B.; Gechev, T.S. ROS-mediated abiotic stress-induced programmed cell death in plants. Front.
Plant Sci. 2015, 6, 1–16. [CrossRef]

68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.

91.

92.

93.
94.
95.
96.

Thakur, M.; Sohal, B.S. Role of elicitors in inducing resistance in plants against pathogen infection: A review. ISRN Biochem. 2013,
2013, 1–10. [CrossRef]
Ali, S.; Khan, N. Delineation of mechanistic approaches employed by plant growth promoting microorganisms for improving
drought stress tolerance in plants. Microbiol. Res. 2021, 249, 126771. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Vardharajula, S.; Ali, S.Z.; Grover, M.; Reddy, G.; Bandi, V. Drought-tolerant plant growth promoting Bacillus spp.: Effect on
growth, osmolytes, and antioxidant status of maize under drought stress. J. Plant Interact. 2011, 6, 1–14. [CrossRef]
Jamiołkowska, A. Natural compounds as elicitors of plant resistance against diseases and new biocontrol strategies. Agronomy
2020, 10, 173. [CrossRef]
Walters, D.; Newton, A.; Lyon, G. (Eds.) Induced Resistance for Plant Defence. A Sustainable Approach to Crop Protection; Blackwell
Publishing: Oxford, UK, 2007; ISBN 978-1-4051-3447-7.
Conrath, U.; Beckers, G.J.; Flors, V.; Garcia-Augustin, P.; Jakab, G.; Mauch, F.; Newman, M.-A.; Pieterse, C.M.J.; Poinssot, B.;
Pozo, M.J.; et al. Priming: Getting ready for battle. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 2006, 19, 1062–1071. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Martinez-Medina, A.; Flors, V.; Heil, M.; Mauch-Mani, B.; Pieterse, C.M.; Pozo, M.J.; Ton, J. Recognizing plant defense priming.
Trends Plant Sci. 2016, 21, 818–822. [CrossRef]
Koziara, W.; Sulewska, H.; Panasiewicz, K. Effect of resistance stimulator application to some agricultural crops. J. Res. Appl.
Agric. Eng. 2006, 51, 82–86.
Babosha, A.V. Changes in lectin activity in plants treated with resistance inducers. Plant Physiol. 2004, 31, 51–55. [CrossRef]
Jones, J.D.G.; Dangl, J.L. The plant immune system. Nature 2006, 444, 323–329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Boller, T.; Felix, G. A renaissance of elicitors: Perception of microbe-associated molecular patterns and danger signals by
pattern-recognition receptors. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 2009, 60, 379–407. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Henry, G.; Thonart, P.; Ongena, M. PAMPs, MAMPs, DAMPs and others: An update on the diversity of plant immunity elicitors.
Biotechnol. Agron. Soc. Environ. 2012, 16, 257–268.
Schwessinger, B.; Ronald, P.C. Plant innate immunity: Perception of conserved microbial signatures. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 2012,
63, 451–482. [CrossRef]
Ranf, S. Sensing of molecular patterns through cell surface immune receptors. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2017, 38, 68–77. [CrossRef]
Bigeard, J.; Colcombet, J.; Hirt, H. Signaling mechanisms in pattern-triggered immunity (PTI). Mol. Plant 2015, 8, 521–539.
[CrossRef]
Wang, C.J.; Yang, W.; Wang, C.; Gu, C.; Niu, D.D.; Liu, H.X.; Wang, Y.P.; Guo, J.H. Induction of drought tolerance in cucumber
plants by a consortium of three plant growth-promoting Rhizobacterium strains. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e52565. [CrossRef]
Shrivastava, P.; Kumar, R. Soil salinity: A serious environmental issue and plant growth promoting bacteria as one of the tools for
its alleviation. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 2015, 22, 123–131. [CrossRef]
Singh, H.B.; Keswani, C.; Reddy, M.S.; Sansinenea, E.; García-Estrada, C. Secondary Metabolites of Plant Growth Promoting
Rhizomicroorganisms: Discovery and Applications; Springer: Singapore, 2019; ISBN 9789811358623.
Oszust, K.; Pylak, M.; Frac,
˛ M. Trichoderma-based biopreparation with prebiotics supplementation for the naturalization of
raspberry plant rhizosphere. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 6356. [CrossRef]
Timmusk, S.; Behers, L.; Muthoni, J.; Muraya, A.; Aronsson, A.C. Perspectives and challenges of microbial application for crop
improvement. Front. Plant Sci. 2017, 8, 49. [CrossRef]
Sokolova, M.G.; Akimova, G.; Vaishlya, O.; Vedernikova, A. Physiological research of efficiency of biologically safe bacterial
fertilizers. J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 2010, 21, 956–970. [CrossRef]
Abd El-Gleel Mosa, W.F.; Paszt, L.S.; Frac,
˛ M.; Trzciński, P.; Treder, W.; Klamkowski, K. The role of biofertilizers in improving
vegetative growth, yield and fruit quality of apple. Hortic. Sci. 2018, 45, 173–180. [CrossRef]
Anli, M.; Baslam, M.; Tahiri, A.; Raklami, A.; Symanczik, S.; Boutasknit, A.; Ait-El-Mokhtar, M.; Ben-Laouane, R.; Toubali, S.;
Ait Rahou, Y.; et al. Biofertilizers as strategies to improve photosynthetic apparatus, growth, and drought stress tolerance in the
date palm. Front. Plant Sci. 2020, 11, 516818. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Aseri, G.K.; Jain, N.; Panwar, J.; Rao, A.V.; Meghwal, P.R. Biofertilizers improve plant growth, fruit yield, nutrition, metabolism
and rhizosphere enzyme activities of pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) in Indian Thar Desert. Sci. Hortic. 2008, 117, 130–135.
[CrossRef]
Cipriano, M.A.P.; Lupatini, M.; Lopes-Santos, L.; da Silva, M.J.; Roesch, L.F.W.; Destéfano, S.A.L.; Freitas, S.S.; Kuramae, E.E.
Lettuce and rhizosphere microbiome responses to growth promoting Pseudomonas species under field conditions. FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 2016, 92, fiw197. [CrossRef]
Niu, X.; Song, L.; Xiao, Y.; Ge, W. Drought-tolerant plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria associated with foxtail millet in a
semi-arid and their potential in alleviating drought stress. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 8, 2580. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Astorga-Eló, M.; Gonzalez, S.; Acuña, J.J.; Sadowsky, M.J.; Jorquera, M.A. Rhizobacteria from ‘flowering desert’ events contribute
to the mitigation of water scarcity stress during tomato seedling germination and growth. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 13745. [CrossRef]
Milet, A.; Chaouche, N.K.; Dehimat, L.; Kaki, A.A.; Mounira, K.A.; Philippe, T. Flow cytometry approach for studying the
interaction between Bacillus mojavensis and Alternaria alternata. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2016, 15, 1417–1428. [CrossRef]
Xie, Z.; Chu, Y.; Zhang, W.; Lang, D.; Zhang, X. Bacillus pumilus alleviates drought stress and increases metabolite accumulation
in Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch. Environ. Exp. Bot. 2019, 158, 99–106. [CrossRef]

97.
98.

99.

100.
101.

102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.

118.
119.

120.
121.
122.

123.

Li, Y.; Shi, H.; Zhang, H.; Chen, S. Amelioration of drought effects in wheat and cucumber by the combined application of super
absorbent polymer and potential biofertilizer. PeerJ 2019, 7, e6073. [CrossRef]
Asghari, B.; Khademian, R.; Sedaghati, B. Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) confer drought resistance and stimulate
biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium L.) under water shortage condition. Sci. Hortic. 2020,
263, 109132. [CrossRef]
Calvo-Polanco, M.; Sánchez-Romera, B.; Aroca, R.; Asins, M.J.; Declerck, S.; Dodd, I.C.; Martínez-Andújar, C.; Albacete, A.;
Ruiz-Lozano, J.M. Exploring the use of recombinant inbred lines in combination with beneficial microbial inoculants (AM fungus
and PGPR) to improve drought stress tolerance in tomato. Environ. Exp. Bot. 2016, 131, 47–57. [CrossRef]
Behrooz, A.; Vahdati, K.; Rejali, F.; Lotfi, M.; Sarikhani, S.; Leslie, C. Arbuscular mycorrhiza and plant growth-promoting bacteria
alleviate drought stress in walnut. HortScience 2019, 54, 1087–1092. [CrossRef]
Kumar, M.; Mishra, S.; Dixit, V.; Kumar, M.; Agarwal, L.; Chauhan, P.S.; Nautiyal, C.S. Synergistic effect of Pseudomonas putida
and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ameliorates drought stress in chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.). Plant Signal. Behav. 2016, 11. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Sandhya, V.; Ali, S.Z.; Grover, M.; Reddy, G.; Venkateswarlu, B. Effect of plant growth promoting Pseudomonas spp. on compatible
solutes, antioxidant status and plant growth of maize under drought stress. Plant Growth Regul. 2010, 62, 21–30. [CrossRef]
Sarma, R.K.; Saikia, R. Alleviation of drought stress in mung bean by strain Pseudomonas aeruginosa GGRJ21. Plant Soil 2014, 377,
111–126. [CrossRef]
Roberson, E.B.; Firestone, M.K. Relationship between desiccation and exopolysaccharide production in a soil Pseudomonas sp.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1992, 58, 1284–1291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Mariotti, L.; Scartazza, A.; Curadi, M.; Picciarelli, P.; Toffanin, A. Azospirillum baldaniorum sp245 induces physiological responses
to alleviate the adverse effects of drought stress in purple basil. Plants 2021, 10, 1141. [CrossRef]
Vettori, L.; Russo, A.; Felici, C.; Fiaschi, G.; Morini, S.; Toffanin, A. Improving micropropagation: Effect of Azospirillum brasilense
Sp245 on acclimatization of rootstocks of fruit tree. J. Plant Interact. 2010, 5, 249–259. [CrossRef]
Heidari, M.; Mousavinik, S.M.; Golpayegani, A. Plant growth promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR) effect on physiological parameters
and mineral uptake in basil (Ociumum basilicum L.) under water stress. ARPN J. Agric. Biol. Sci. 2011, 6, 6–11.
Jones, P.D.; Lister, D.H.; Jaggard, K.W.; Pidgeon, J.D. Future climate impact on the productivity of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris L.) in
Europe. Clim. Chang. 2003, 58, 98–103. [CrossRef]
Gauvry, E.; Mathot, A.-G.; Leguérinel, I.; Couvert, O.; Postollec, F.; Broussolle, V.; Coroller, L. Knowledge of the physiology of
spore-forming bacteria can explain the origin of spores in the food environment. Res. Microbiol. 2016, 168, 369–378. [CrossRef]
Radhakrishnan, R.; Hashem, A.; Abd Allah, E.F. Bacillus: A biological tool for crop improvement through bio-molecular changes
in adverse environments. Front. Physiol. 2017, 8, 667. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Prajakta, B.M.; Suvarna, P.P.; Raghvendra, S.P.; Alok, R.R. Potential biocontrol and superlative plant growth promoting activity of
indigenous Bacillus mojavensis PB-35 (R11) of soybean (Glycine max) rhizosphere. SN Appl. Sci. 2019, 1, 1143. [CrossRef]
Wang, C.; Guo, Y.; Wang, C.; Liu, H.; Niu, D.; Wang, Y.; Guo, J. Enhancement of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) tolerance to
drought stress by plant-growth-promoting rhizobacterium (PGPR) Bacillus cereus AR. J. Agric. Biotechnol. 2012, 20, 1097–1105.
Lim, J.H.; Kim, S.D. Induction of drought stress resistance by multi-functional PGPR Bacillus licheniformis K11 in pepper. Plant
Pathol. J. 2013, 29, 201–208. [CrossRef]
Kaushal, M.; Wani, S.P. Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria: Drought stress alleviators to ameliorate crop production in
drylands. Ann. Microbiol. 2016, 66, 35–42. [CrossRef]
Arkhipova, T.N.; Prinsen, E.; Veselov, S.U.; Martinenko, E.V.; Melentiev, A.I.; Kudoyarova, G.R. Cytokinin producing bacteria
enhance plant growth in drying soil. Plant Soil 2007, 292, 305–315. [CrossRef]
Kramer, S.; Green, D.M. Acid and alkaline phosphatase dynamics and their relationship to soil microclimate in a semiarid
woodland. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2000, 32, 179–188. [CrossRef]
Omer, A.M. Bioformulations of Bacillus spores for using as biofertilizer biovalorization of olive mill waste water for the production
of natural biofertilizers and antioxidants view project isolation and identification of fungi and bacteria from different Egyptian e.
Life Sci. J. 2010, 7, 1097–8135.
O’Hara, G.W.; Boonkerd, N.; Dilworth, M.J. Mineral constraints to nitrogen fixation. Plant Soil 1988, 108, 93–110. [CrossRef]
Xu, X.; Du, X.; Wang, F.; Sha, J.; Chen, Q.; Tian, G.; Zhu, Z.; Ge, S.; Jiang, Y. Effects of potassium levels on plant growth,
accumulation and distribution of carbon, and nitrate metabolism in apple Dwarf Rootstock seedlings. Front. Plant Sci. 2020,
11, 904. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Avakyan, Z.A. Silicon compounds in solution bacteria quartz degradation. Mikrobiologiya 1984, 54, 301–307.
Malinovskaya, I.M.; Kosenko, L.V.; Votselko, S.K.; Podgorsky, V.S. The role of Bacillus mucilaginosus polysaccharide in the
destruction of silicate minerals. Mikrobiologiya 1990, 59, 70–78.
Barnawal, D.; Maji, D.; Bharti, N.; Chanotiya, C.S.; Kalra, A. ACC deaminase-containing Bacillus subtilis reduces stress ethyleneinduced damage and improves mycorrhizal colonization and rhizobial nodulation in Trigonella foenum-graecum under drought
stress. J. Plant Growth Regul. 2013, 32, 809–822. [CrossRef]
Malusá, E.; Sas-Paszt, L.; Ciesielska, J. Technologies for beneficial microorganisms inocula used as biofertilizers. Sci. World J. 2012,
1–12. [CrossRef]

124. Roberts, M.S.; Nakamura, L.K.; Cohan, F.M. Bacillus mojavensis sp. nov., distinguishable from Bacillus subtilis by sexual isolation,
divergence in DNA sequence, and differences in fatty acid composition. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 1994, 44, 256–264. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
125. Cao, L.; Qiu, Z.; You, J.; Tan, H.; Zhou, S. Isolation and characterization of endophytic Streptomyces strains from surface-sterilized
tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) roots. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2004, 39, 425–430. [CrossRef]
126. Moussa, T.A. Studies on biological control of sugar beet pathogen Rhizoctonia solani Kühn. J. Biol. Sci. 2002, 2, 800–804.
127. Snook, M.E.; Mitchell, T.; Hinton, D.M.; Bacon, C.W. Isolation and characterization of Leu 7-surfactin from the endophytic
bacterium Bacillus mojavensis RRC 101, a biocontrol agent for Fusarium verticillioides. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2009, 57, 4287–4292.
[CrossRef]
128. Romano-Armada, N.; Yañez-Yazlle, M.F.; Irazusta, V.P.; Rajal, V.B.; Moraga, N.B. Potential of bioremediation and PGP traits in
Streptomyces as strategies for bio-reclamation of salt-affected soils for agriculture. Pathogens 2020, 9, 117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
129. Hamedi, J.; Mohammadipanah, F. Biotechnological application and taxonomical distribution of plant growth promoting actinobacteria. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2015, 42, 157–171. [CrossRef]
130. Chitraselvi, R.P.E. Actinomycetes: Dependable tool for sustainable agriculture. Curr. Investig. Agric. Curr. Res. 2018, 1, 128–130.
[CrossRef]
131. Lawlor, K.; Knight, B.P.; Barbosa-Jefferson, V.L.; Lane, P.W.; Lilley, A.K.; Paton, G.I.; McGrath, S.P.; O’Flaherty, S.M.; Hirsch, P.R.
Comparison of methods to investigate microbial populations in soils under different agricultural management. FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 2000, 33, 129–137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Pierzynski, G.M.; Vance, G.F.; Sims, J.T. Soils and Environmental Quality; Taylor and Francis: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2005.
133. Khamna, S.; Yokota, A.; Peberdy, J.F.; Lumyong, S. Indole-3-acetic acid production by Streptomyces sp. isolated from some Thai
medicinal plant rhizosphere soils. Eur. Asian J. Biosci. 2010, 4, 23–32. [CrossRef]
134. El-Tarabily, K.A. Promotion of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) plant growth by rhizosphere competent 1-aminocyclopropane1-carboxylic acid deaminase-producing Streptomycete Actinomycetes. Plant Soil 2008, 308, 161–174. [CrossRef]
135. Gopalakrishnan, S.; Srinivas, V.; Vidya, M.S.; Rathore, A. Plant growth-promoting activities of Streptomyces spp. in sorghum and
rice. Springerplus 2013, 2, 1–8. [CrossRef]
136. El-Sayed, S.F.; Hassan, H.A.; El-Mogy, M.M. Impact of bio- and organic fertilizers on potato yield, quality and tuber weight loss
after harvest. Potato Res. 2015, 58, 67–81. [CrossRef]
137. Wahyudi, A.T.; Priyanto, J.A.; Afrista, R.; Kurniati, D.; Astuti, R.I.; Akhdiya, A. Plant growth promoting activity of Actinomycetes
isolated from soybean rhizosphere. Online J. Biol. Sci. 2019, 19, 1–8. [CrossRef]
138. Tredici, P. Del Nitrogen fixation: The story of the Frankia symbiosis. Arnold Arbor. 1995, 55, 26–31.
139. Treseder, K.K.; Berlemont, R.; Allison, S.D.; Martiny, A.C. Drought increases the frequencies of fungal functional genes related to
carbon and nitrogen acquisition. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0206441. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Treseder, K.K.; Lennon, J.T. Fungal traits that drive ecosystem dynamics on land. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2015, 79, 243–262.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Jiménez-Arias, D.; García-Machado, F.J.; Morales-Sierra, S.; García-García, A.L.; Herrera, A.J.; Valdés, F.; Luis, J.C.; Borges, A.A.
A beginner’s guide to osmoprotection by biostimulants. Plants 2021, 10, 363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Hardoim, P.R.; van Overbeek, L.S.; Berg, G.; Pirttilä, A.M.; Compant, S.; Campisano, A.; Döring, M.; Sessitsch, A. The hidden
world within plants: Ecological and evolutionary considerations for defining functioning of microbial endophytes. Microbiol. Mol.
Biol. Rev. 2015, 79, 293–320. [CrossRef]
143. Verma, H.; Kumar, D.; Kumar, V.; Kumari, M.; Singh, S.K.; Sharma, V.K.; Droby, S.; Santoyo, G.; White, J.F.; Kumar, A.
The potential application of endophytes in management of stress from drought and salinity in crop plants. Microorganisms 2021,
9, 1729. [CrossRef]
144. Bizos, G.; Papatheodorou, E.M.; Chatzistathis, T.; Ntalli, N.; Aschonitis, V.G.; Monokrousos, N. The role of microbial inoculants
on plant protection, growth stimulation, and crop productivity of the olive tree (Olea europea L.). Plants 2020, 9, 743. [CrossRef]
145. Bona, E.; Lingua, G.; Manassero, P.; Cantamessa, S.; Marsano, F.; Todeschini, V.; Copetta, A.; D’Agostino, G.; Massa, N.;
Avidano, L.; et al. AM fungi and PGP Pseudomonads increase flowering, fruit production, and vitamin content in strawberry
grown at low nitrogen and phosphorus levels. Mycorrhiza 2015, 25, 181–193. [CrossRef]
146. Adamec, S.; Andrejiová, A. Mycorrhiza and stress tolerance of vegetables: A review. Acta Hortic. Regiotect. 2018, 21, 30–35.
[CrossRef]
147. Marulanda, A.; Barea, J.M.; Azcón, R. Stimulation of plant growth and drought tolerance by native microorganisms (AM fungi
and bacteria) from dry environments: Mechanisms related to bacterial effectiveness. J. Plant Growth Regul. 2009, 28, 115–124.
[CrossRef]
148. Matias, S.R.; Pagano, M.C.; Muzzi, F.C.; Oliveira, C.A.; Carneiro, A.A.; Horta, S.N.; Scotti, M.R. Effect of rhizobia, mycorrhizal
fungi and phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms in the rhizosphere of native plants used to recover an iron ore area in Brazil.
Eur. J. Soil Biol. 2009, 45, 259–266. [CrossRef]
149. Dreischhoff, S.; Das, I.S.; Jakobi, M.; Kasper, K.; Polle, A. Local responses and systemic induced resistance mediated by
ectomycorrhizal fungi. Front. Plant Sci. 2020, 11, 590063. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. De Battista, J.P.; Bacon, C.W.; Severson, R.; Plattner, R.D. Indole acetic acid production by the fungal endophyte of Tall Fescue.
Agron. J. 1990, 82, 878–880. [CrossRef]

151. Khan, A.L.; Waqas, M.; Khan, A.R.; Hussain, J.; Kang, S.M.; Gilani, S.A.; Hamayun, M.; Shin, J.H.; Kamran, M.; Al-Harrasi, A.;
et al. Fungal endophyte Penicillium janthinellum LK5 improves growth of ABA-deficient tomato under salinity. World J. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2013, 29, 2133–2144. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Ren, A.; Clayy, K. Impact of a horizontally transmitted endophyte, Balansia henningsiana, on growth and drought tolerance of
Panicum rigidulum. Int. J. Plant Sci. 2009, 170, 599–608. [CrossRef]
153. Dastogeer, K.M.G.; Li, H.; Sivasithamparam, K.; Jones, M.G.K.; Wylie, S.J. Fungal endophytes and a virus confer drought tolerance
to Nicotiana benthamiana plants through modulating osmolytes, antioxidant enzymes and expression of host drought responsive
genes. Environ. Exp. Bot. 2018, 149, 95–108. [CrossRef]
154. Davies, F.T.; Potter, J.R.; Linderman Davies, R.G.; Ft, R.; Linderman, R. Drought resistance of mycorrhizal pepper plants
independent of leaf P concentration-response in gas exchange and water relations. Physiol. Plant. 1993, 87, 45–53. [CrossRef]
155. Liao, X.; Chen, J.; Guan, R.; Liu, J.; Sun, Q. Two arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi alleviates drought stress and improves plant growth
in Cinnamomum migao seedlings. Mycobiology 2021, 49, 396–405. [CrossRef]
156. Azad, K.; Kaminskyj, S. A fungal endophyte strategy for mitigating the effect of salt and drought stress on plant growth. Symbiosis
2016, 68, 73–78. [CrossRef]
157. Sun, C.; Johnson, J.M.; Cai, D.; Sherameti, I.; Oelmüller, R.; Lou, B. Piriformospora indica confers drought tolerance in Chinese
cabbage leaves by stimulating antioxidant enzymes, the expression of drought-related genes and the plastid-localized CAS
protein. J. Plant Physiol. 2010, 167, 1009–1017. [CrossRef]
158. Morsy, M.; Cleckler, B.; Armuelles-Millican, H. Fungal endophytes promote tomato growth and enhance drought and salt
tolerance. Plants 2020, 9, 877. [CrossRef]
159. Subramanian, K.S.; Santhanakrishnan, P.; Balasubramanian, P. Responses of field grown tomato plants to arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungal colonization under varying intensities of drought stress. Sci. Hortic. 2006, 107, 245–253. [CrossRef]
160. Bae, H.; Sicher, R.C.; Kim, M.S.; Kim, S.H.; Strem, M.D.; Melnick, R.L.; Bailey, B.A. The beneficial endophyte Trichoderma hamatum
isolate DIS 219b promotes growth and delays the onset of the drought response in Theobroma cacao. J. Exp. Bot. 2009, 60, 3279–3295.
[CrossRef]
161. Wu, Q.S.; Xia, R.X.; Zou, Y.N. Improved soil structure and citrus growth after inoculation with three arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
under drought stress. Eur. J. Soil Biol. 2008, 44, 122–128. [CrossRef]
162. Thirumalai, E.; Venkatachalam, A.; Suryanarayanan, T.S. Fungal endophytes of betel leaves: The need to study mycotoxinproducing endophytes in leafy vegetables. Sydowia 2020, 73, 83–88. [CrossRef]
163. Carbone, M.J.; Alaniz, S.; Mondino, P.; Gelabert, M.; Eichmeier, A.; Tekielska, D.; Bujanda, R.; Gramaje, D. Drought influences
fungal community dynamics in the grapevine rhizosphere and root microbiome. J. Fungi 2021, 7, 686. [CrossRef]
164. Piri, R.; Moradi, A.; Balouchi, H.; Salehi, A. Improvement of cumin (Cuminum cyminum) seed performance under drought stress
by seed coating and biopriming. Sci. Hortic. 2019, 257, 108667. [CrossRef]

Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.