 		“I Don’t Want Them to Be like Me”:Discourses of Inferiority and Language Shift in Upper Necaxa Totonac  AbstractThis study examines the language ideologies behind the shift away from the use of Upper Necaxa Totonac, an indigenous language of Mexico. Five themes characterize the discourses of the first generation of parents who socialized their children to use Spanish, the majority language, as the everyday language of communication: preoccupation with their children’s future, an unfavorable view of indigenous identity, the association of the past with suffering, concern about their children’s proficiency in Spanish, and the inability to force children to learn the indigenous language. These discourses reveal an ideology that views being indigenous as inferior, leading parents to eschew the transmission of their language.1. IntroductionLanguage shift is generally due to a “power differential” (Hyltenstam and Stroud 1996:568) between a minority group and a more dominant one that results in the marginalization of the former. Under such conditions, it is natural that speakers of minority languages seek to learn dominant languages in order to access more social, economic, and political opportunities. While dominant languages and minority languages can, and do, coexist in a stable manner within the same community, in the last half century or so the acquisition of a dominant language has often resulted in the abandonment of the minority language (Dorian 1998). Such is the case of Upper Necaxa Totonac,1 a language of the Totonac-Tepehua language family that is spoken by some 2600 people in the northeastern part of Puebla state in Mexico (Beck 2011; INEGI 2020).2 The construction of local schools and a change to a cash economy led to the adoption of Spanish as a daily language in the 1970s and 1980s in order to take advantage of the new educational and economic opportunities. Although there was no particular impetus to stop speaking Upper Necaxa Totonac, it is nonetheless the case that nowadays, regular users of the language [End Page 159] are overwhelmingly aged fifty or older, while younger people are generally Spanish-dominant, if not completely monolingual in Spanish. Their lack of proficiency in the community language can be attributed in large part to their parents’ insistence on speaking only Spanish to them, thus interrupting the intergenerational transmission of Upper Necaxa Totonac.  While it is understandable why parents want their children to learn Spanish, it is less clear why they choose not to teach them Upper Necaxa Totonac as well. The disruption in the transmission of the minority language can be best understood through a close examination of language ideologies, defined most succinctly by Field and Kroskrity as “beliefs and feelings about language and discourse” (2009:4; see Austin and Sallabank [2014] for alternate definitions). Several decades of research have now established that language ideologies are the driving force behind language practices, as “it is only through the interpretive filter of beliefs about language, cognition, and social relations that political and economic events have an effect on language maintenance or shift” (Woolard 1998:16). These beliefs are revealed, in part, by how speakers talk about themselves, their languages, their lives, and their communities. To that end, this article investigates the different discourses surrounding language that are expressed by the first generation of parents and caregivers who actively used Spanish rather than Upper Necaxa Totonac with their children—the “bridge generation” (Cavanaugh 2004:32) or the “shift generation” (Reynolds 2009) who paved the way for a community-wide language shift by socializing their children to use the dominant language for everyday communication. Five discursive themes characterize the parents’ conversations with me, encompassing notions of progress, indigenous identity, and past times, as well as beliefs about language acquisition and parenting. The quotation at the beginning of the article is an illustrative example of the strong sentiment of inferiority that underlies their discourses and reveals an unfavorable evaluation of being indigenous that reinforces, rather than resists, the already powerful external pressures to abandon their language in favor of Spanish.2. Analytical framework: language ideologiesMeasures of language vitality, such as the evaluative factors proposed by the UNESCO Ad Hoc Expert Group on Endangered Languages (2003), the Language Endangerment Index (Lee and Van Way 2016), and the Expanded Graded Intergenerational Disruption Index (Lewis and Simons 2010), tend to emphasize the types and numbers of speakers, as well as the domains in which the language is used—what Pauwels terms “who speaks what language to whom, when” (2015:83), in spite of the well-known problems with measuring these sociodemographic variables (Moore, Pietikäinen, and Blommaert 2010). Other typologies of minority language situations have considered a broader set of factors, such as political-legal conditions, the structure of the economy, the educational system, and the amount of representation in the media (Hyltenstam and Stroud 1996). These [End Page 160] typologies, however, still fail to sufficiently account for the full range of language behavior in a community. For instance, in the case of Upper Necaxa Totonac, the use of Spanish can be attributed to the higher social prestige of the language and its dominance in public institutions, such as schools, the economy, and government. However, this alone does not explain why two Totonac adults casually converse in Spanish, nor why parents speak Upper Necaxa Totonac to each other but address their children solely in the dominant language. Further evidence lies in the differential rates of language shift among indigenous communities in Mexico, from languages with a small number of mostly older speakers to others where there is still a substantial proportion of younger users (INALI 2012). Even within a single ethnolinguistic group, there are noticeable differences in language use among neighboring communities, not to mention within individual communities themselves (e.g., for Nahuatl, see Hill and Hill 1986 and Messing 2007). Such variation cannot be explained by simply considering the socioeconomic and sociopolitical conditions, as these circumstances are similar throughout Mexico and should thus lead to comparable outcomes.  Discussions of language endangerment have long acknowledged the futility of attributing language shift solely to macrosocial variables while ignoring the “attitudes, interpretations, identifications, and actions of speakers” (Dressler 1988:191). Even though Edwards considers language shift to be largely the result of speakers conducting a “cost-benefit analysis” of how the minority language impacts their security and well-being, he admits that it is short-sighted to rely on “an overly simplistic economic determinism” (1994:12), using as an example the maintenance of a minority language for faith reasons, which may be counterproductive from a socioeconomic perspective but serves as an identity marker for the group. It is examples like these that lead Hyltenstam and Stroud to consider macrosocial variables as “framing conditions” (1996:568) for language shift and maintenance, which, however, are by themselves insufficient to account for individual speech behavior. Similarly, Grenoble and Whaley believe that while macrosocial variables are useful as “broad indicators of the potential threat that exists to minority languages in a given region of the world” (1998: 27), language vitality must be investigated “at the microlevel, within microecologies” (Grenoble 2016:296), or, as Jane Hill said, “every endangered language is endangered in its own way” (2011:x).  This “own way” has to do with how speakers view and interpret their particular situation, as these perceptions influence how they subsequently respond. There now exists ample research on the role of language ideologies in understanding minority language situations. An influential example can be found in Kulick’s (1992) ethnography of a Taiap village in Papua New Guinea in the 1980s. Despite the absence of any obvious external social pressures to shift to a more dominant language—the community was geographically isolated and largely self-sufficient—an ideological transformation within the community led them to adopt Tok Pisin because they associated it with modernity and [End Page 161] self-control, which they considered to be desirable qualities. Examples such as this highlight the limitations of considering macrosocial conditions as the sole catalyst for language shift without taking into account how speakers perceive the social circumstances in which they live. Nonetheless, many continue to believe that language loss is something that is done to speakers, not by speakers. In Mexico, “discrimination” is a common explanation given by both indigenous and nonindigenous Mexicans, linguists and nonlinguists alike, for why languages are disappearing, even though, as Rinehart observed in her work with Miami speakers, “language shift is far too complex a process to be relegated to assimilation with little to no explanation” (2011:94). Moreover, such an explanation removes all agency from the speakers, portraying them as incapable of responding to external circumstances—a viewpoint that risks recreating the colonialist “ideology of contempt” that cast into doubt the “very humanity” of the peoples that the Europeans encountered (Dorian 1998:10).  This is not to say that language shift is the result of a free and rational choice by speakers to give up their language, as “actions are socioculturally constrained in the possibility of their deployments and in their effects” (Sicoli 2011:162). As Granadillo and Orcutt-Gachiri stress, the notion of agency “is tempered by context, by structural and institutional constraints that are beyond an individual’s control but to which the individual can creatively respond” (2011:2). Dorian admits that while it is true that “no one actually holds a knife to the throats of the bilinguals and threatens them with death if they do not abandon their ancestral home language immediately,” she points out that “centuries of social, economic, and legal discrimination can pose a potent enough threat to make the one available route to socioeconomic survival an irresistible one” (1994:118). How well speakers are able to resist such threats is dependent on how dire they perceive their situation to be, which, in turn, influences the value that they place on their language—the “cost-benefit” metaphor that Edwards (1994) used.  An examination of minority language situations must thus include both a description of the social context and a consideration of how speakers’ lived experiences within this context have shaped their beliefs about language. Language ideologies provide a powerful analytical tool for studying language use precisely because they link the social and the personal. They “envision and enact connections between aspects of language and other arenas of social life” (Gal 1998:323), including “the political economic interest of individual speakers, ethnic and other interest groups, and nation states” (Kroskrity 2010:192), as well as “the very notion of the person and the social group, as well as such fundamental social institutions as religious ritual, child socialization, gender relations, the nation-state, schooling, and law” (Woolard 1998:3). Language ideologies take into account not only what speakers think about language, but also how they understand the social context in which they live, where they position themselves within this context, and what their aspirations are. [End Page 162]  One way to discern language ideologies is through an examination of discourse. Although discourse is not the only siting of language ideologies (Woolard 1998), what people say—their “discursive consciousness” (Kroskrity 2009:73)— can nonetheless be indicative of their underlying beliefs, especially when examined in conjunction with their actual practices, or their “practical consciousness” (2009:73). Analysis of discourse requires “a double analytical strategy” (Gal 1998:323) that considers not only talk about language, which may ultimately not be about language itself, but also narratives about other aspects of social life that may contain hidden beliefs about language. In her work with Mexicano (Nahuatl) communities in the Malinche region of Mexico, Hill identified a set of “rhetorical themes” (1991:264) that valorized the past over the present. Although none of the speakers referred to all the themes or connected them into a coherent argument, the way they linked the use of Mexicano to other aspects of their past life led Hill to identify an ideology of nostalgia that underlay a purist attitude toward speaking Mexicano. Applying a similar approach, Messing (2007) found a dominant metadiscourse of salir adelante ‘forging ahead’ in Mexicano communities in the state of Tlaxcala, where use of the indigenous language depended on whether progress and modernity were viewed from the hegemonic stance of menosprecio ‘denigration’ of the indigenous identity or from a locally-grounded pro-indígena ‘pro-indigenous’ perspective. The need to look beyond discourses that explicitly refer to language has led Kroskrity to propose the notion of a “language ideological assemblage,” where language ideologies are “part of a larger complex of relevant beliefs and feelings, both Indigenous and externally imposed, that may complement, contest, or otherwise dynamically interact with each other to modify language ideologies and linguistic practices” (2018:134).  This article implements Hill’s and Messing’s methodology by examining the discourses about language expressed by Totonac parents. Adopting Kroskrity’s notion of a language ideological assemblage, I consider not only what parents say about Upper Necaxa Totonac and Spanish, but also their discourses regarding aspects of their life that have an impact on language practices, such as their conceptions of modern life and their understanding of how languages are learned. The data are drawn from twelve hours of formal recorded interviews with sixteen parents, identified by their initials, and are complemented by copious field notes, observations, and informal conversations with these parents and other community members during six fieldwork visits, each lasting four to six weeks, between 2003 and 2017. All our interactions took place in Spanish, the expected language of use with outsiders and particularly with foreigners like me. After multiple rereadings of the data using an iterative process of thematic coding, I identify five discursive themes that characterize the parents’ talk about their language practices and experiences: concern about their children’s future (Messing’s salir adelante discourse); an unfavorable view of indigenous identity (Messing’s menosprecio discourse); the association of the past with [End Page 163] suffering (in contrast to Hill and Hill’s discourse of nostalgia); the belief that learning Upper Necaxa Totonac will harm their children’s acquisition of Spanish; and the inability of parents to force children to learn the indigenous language. These five discourses reveal an overarching ideology that views being indigenous as inferior and that leads parents to eschew the transmission of their language, the most conspicuous marker of their indigenous origin, in hopes that their children will avoid suffering the same fate as them.3. The communitiesUpper Necaxa Totonac is one of several indigenous languages spoken in the Sierra Norte de Puebla region in northeastern Puebla state in Mexico. According to the catalogue of national indigenous languages (Catálogo de las lenguas indígenas nacionales) published by the Mexican government (INALI 2009), Upper Necaxa Totonac is spoken in four communities—Chicontla (pop. 3,700), Patla (pop. 1,600), San Pedro Tlaolantongo (pop. 1,000), and Cacahuatlán (pop. 250), located in the upper portion of the Necaxa River Valley, hence the language name. My fieldwork was conducted in Chicontla and Patla, the two largest and most accessible communities.  Although the region is sparsely populated due to the rugged terrain, movement in and out of Chicontla and Patla has been relatively easy following the construction of a surfaced road in the 1990s, allowing for daily shuttle service between the communities and Xicotepec de Juárez,3 the nearest urban center inhabited mostly by mestizos (Mexicans who do not identify as indigenous). Since my first visit in 2002, when it was not unusual to spend an hour waiting for a shuttle, day trips to Xicotepec have become commonplace, with two competing companies running shuttles multiple times an hour. Many people prefer to buy goods in the city because selection is limited in the communities and prices are higher due to added transportation costs. They also go to Xicotepec for banking and government services as well as for medical care, as the local clinics are severely underequipped. In addition, communication links have improved greatly since telephone lines were installed in the mid-2000s, followed soon after by the Internet and then by a cell tower in the mid-2010s. Although personal computers remain a luxury, cellphones and televisions are ubiquitous. These days, the communities of Chicontla and Patla are very much plugged into the outside world, a change that they have happily embraced, as their discourses below reveal.  Some of the ideologies I identify likely date back decades; indeed, the elders I talked to expressed many of the same beliefs as their younger counterparts born one or two decades later. Nonetheless, the widespread adoption of Spanish did not occur until the 1970s and 1980s, when two major social changes— the establishment of local schools and the change to a cash economy—provided the impetus for language shift by significantly increasing the need for Spanish. Prior to this period, using Spanish as the primary form of communication was impractical when the majority of community members had little or no [End Page 164] knowledge of the language, even if they were ideologically inclined toward Spanish. It is for this reason that Dorian (1994) attributes the timing of language shift to socioeconomic changes rather than to ideological ones.  In the case of Chicontla and Patla, the first change was the construction of schools within the communities, starting in the late 1960s with the primary schools. Having local schools put education within the reach of most families, who no longer had to send children away to attend classes. While improved accessibility to education is always beneficial, it is not without its downside: the curriculum was, and continues to be, entirely in Spanish. Even at the bilingual elementary school in Patla, all instruction is in Spanish; the only difference between it and the regular school, according to parents, is that children are not reprimanded for speaking the indigenous language in the classroom. Because of the schools, children are exposed to Spanish from a young age, and furthermore, they are required to use Spanish on a daily basis to communicate with their teachers, most of whom do not speak the local language (nor desire to learn it). As is the case in other communities (e.g., Garzon 1992; De Korne 2017), community members pin the blame for language shift on the schools: “the teachers came . . . bit by bit the young ones learned to speak Spanish and that’s where they began to abandon Totonac, they no longer spoke Totonac there at the school, they spoke to you only in Spanish, so that’s how Totonac was disappearing” (LBS).4  The second major societal change was in the economy. When the value of coffee rose dramatically in the 1970s and early 1980s, farmers were encouraged to switch from subsistence farming to coffee cultivation. The burgeoning coffee trade attracted many mestizos to the communities, in particular to Chicontla, and this immigration is still reflected in its current demographic makeup and its tense relationship with Patla, where the population remains almost entirely indigenous. The change to cash crops also meant that people became reliant on the regional economy, which operated in Spanish, in order to obtain the goods and services they needed. When the value of coffee beans plummeted at the end of the 1980s, many people found themselves in desperate financial straits and were forced to find work elsewhere, leading to a mass migration to urban centers such as Mexico City and to the United States.  These two changes were responsible not only for increasing contact with Spanish speakers, but, more significantly, they made Spanish a required language in the communities. Knowing Spanish is needed not only for communication with outsiders, but also for getting an education, which is the precursor for finding a secure job. In other words, Spanish has become not simply a desirable language, but a necessary one, and not being able to speak it can have severe repercussions on one’s survival and well-being—the primary concern of parents for their children. The indispensability of Spanish as a result of the socioeconomic changes reinforces existing negative ideologies toward the indigenous language and serves as fuel for new ones to take hold. [End Page 165]  The current sociolinguistic profile of Chicontla and Patla reflects the events of the 1970s and 1980s. According to the national census (INEGI 2020), the bilingualism rate in both communities surpasses 95 percent, although it is unclear what level of proficiency is implied. In Chicontla, despite a sizeable proportion of mestizos who were attracted there by the coffee trade, 71 percent of the population still declare being part of an indigenous household. However, only 35 percent self-identify as speakers of an indigenous language. Patla has a much smaller nonindigenous population, but like Chicontla, fewer people identify as speakers (65 percent) than as members of an indigenous household (96 percent), a signal that language shift is well underway in both communities. Indeed, in Chicontla there are no identified speakers who are under five years of age, and in Patla there are only seven preschool children who are reported to speak the language (0.7 percent of speakers). The one noticeable difference between Chicontla and Patla is in the linguistic landscape. Upper Necaxa Totonac is rarely heard on the streets in Chicontla, even among people known to be speakers, and a private conversation in the local language suddenly switches to Spanish the moment someone else is within earshot. An outsider would believe Chicontla to be a mestizo town, as there is no public presence of a language other than Spanish. In contrast, the indigenous language is still heard in public domains in Patla, including among young adults, although the latter also speak Spanish with equal (or greater) frequency. Significantly, children under age fifteen in Patla are not heard speaking Upper Necaxa Totonac, and loudspeaker announcements from the town hall are always in Spanish, despite the fact that the announcer and the listeners understand the local language. Even in Patla, there are signs of the declining vitality of Upper Necaxa Totonac.  The parents I interviewed directly were all teenagers or young adults during the 1970s and 1980s. They were among the first to benefit from the improved access to schooling and to have daily contact with Spanish speakers. These experiences allowed them to gain enough proficiency in the dominant language that they could teach it to their children if they so wished, which many of them did, given the growing importance of Spanish in their lives. What is worth further examination is why many of these parents withheld the transmission of Upper Necaxa Totonac to their children even as they continued to speak the language with each other. Moreover, at the time, there were still enough monolingual speakers for the local language to serve a communicative purpose, as evidenced by how the children of the Patla parents managed to learn the language through community interactions despite a lack of home support (in Chicontla, the smaller proportion of indigenous speakers seems to have impeded such transmission). In order to understand the parents’ reluctance to teach their children Upper Necaxa Totonac, we must look at their discourses about their language and their lives. [End Page 166]4. Discourses about Upper Necaxa Totonac4.1. “So you don’t suffer like your father suffered”: discourses about progressWhen speaking about their home language practices, the first thing that many parents mentioned was their wish that their children have a better future than they did, “so you don’t suffer like your father suffered because your father worked in the fields” (CFM). They knew that the path to a secure future was a good education, which they themselves lacked because schooling was less valued during their childhood and many were only able to complete primary school. Not wanting their children to suffer from limited opportunities as they did, they believed strongly that their children should “take advantage of their studies and that someday they’ll have a good job” (CFM). Given that the curriculum is imparted solely in the dominant language, they felt pressure to prepare their children for school by speaking Spanish to them “so that they understand everything the teacher tells them” (AFM).  Teachers have reproduced the ideology of hispanization in the education system by warning parents about the dire consequences of their children not knowing Spanish when they enter school, and the parents did not question this advice out of fear that their children’s progress be harmed. Furthermore, they remembered themselves being berated by teachers for using their language in class.When I was in school, well, only Totonac, we spoke only Totonac, until the teacher scolded us and, and what can we do since it’s our dialect? Because there are also those who can’t speak Spanish and so they chat in Totonac and so, until they told us, “Be quiet! You sound like parakeets, I don’t understand you at all.”[GMM]Instead of making an effort to learn the local language in order to communicate with the children, the teachers preferred to accuse them of misbehaving: “whoever speaks in Totonac, then ‘ah, you’re saying rude things [groserías] to me, you said rude things, you said rude things’, the teachers say to them” (AFE). Such experiences reinforce the link between Spanish and academic success, while speaking Totonac is seen as an unacceptable behavior that leads to punishment.  The association of Spanish with progress is strengthened by the general lack of economic opportunities in rural communities, forcing young people to move to larger urban centers in search of employment. Although there are many indigenous language speakers in the cities, Spanish is the overwhelmingly dominant language, and survival in urban centers depends on being able to communicate in Spanish. Otherwise, as GMM recalled from her own experiences, “sometimes I was scared because I didn’t know Spanish well, what will happen if I’m not with the person who takes me and I won’t understand what they say to me, what will happen to me?” Knowing Spanish is vital so that they know “how to take [End Page 167] care of themselves, when they arrive at a place where they speak only Spanish, but that they know how to cope, have a conversation, or get a job” (PSM). Although PSM did not mention Totonac, despite that being the question I asked (“Do you think it would be a good idea to have classes in Totonac at school?”), we can infer from his response that he considered the indigenous language to be of little use for survival in the outside world. In fact, the discourse surrounding the lack of proficiency in Spanish seemed always to be phrased in negative terms, as an obstacle that prevents you from accomplishing things: you cannot do well in school (LCV), talk to outsiders (GMM), buy medicine (LBS), or travel (LCT). Not knowing Spanish is cause for pity, with AFM stating that she “felt sorry” for children who did not speak Spanish, while GMM surmised that “if my children don’t learn Spanish, then poor them.” These statements reflect a vision of the Totonac language as some sort of handicap that prevents children from developing to their full potential and making a better life for themselves.4.2. “People of reason” and “people of indigenous dress”: discourses about being indigenousSince colonial times, minority groups have suffered discrimination from European settlers who considered them subordinate (Dorian 1998). The term indio ‘Indian’ was used by the Spanish colonists to refer to the Other whom they did not understand ( Guerrero Galván and San Giacomo 2014), thereby establishing a racial and social divide that persists to this day in Mexico, where indio continues to be a derogatory term for indigenous peoples. According to the 2017 survey on discrimination in Mexico City (COPRED 2017), people of indigenous origin were considered the most discriminated-against group. It is worthwhile to note that in third place were people with dark skin; in fourth place, the poor; and in fifth place, those who had a different language or way of speaking. These three characteristics are all closely associated with (though not exclusive to) being indigenous, which highlights how deeply in-grained the prejudice against indigenous peoples is.5  While some indigenous speakers have challenged these discriminatory ideologies through the production of counterdiscourses (e.g., Messing 2007; De Korne 2017; McGraw 2019), the Totonac parents in Chicontla and Patla simply reproduced hegemonic representations of indigenous peoples. In their narratives, they often referred to nonindigenous Mexicans as gente de razón ‘people of reason’, while they are merely gente de calzón ‘people of indigenous dress’ (calzones are the traditional white cotton pants worn by Totonac men), thus echoing the European view of indigenous peoples as ignorant and irrational. Bartolomé (1997, quoted in Guerrero Galván and San Giacomo 2014:1479 n. 14) noted that this type of juxtaposition is widespread throughout Mexico. As another example, some Otomí refer to nonindigenous Mexicans as mboho ‘people of the city’ in opposition to hyoya jä’i ‘pitiful people’, with the categorization being based on your skin color and whether you speak Otomí, and not whether you are actually from the city (Noel Pérez Pérez p.c. 2017). In both cases, the opposition is stark: [End Page 168] being mestizo is associated with intelligence and civilization, while being indigenous is linked to backwardness and suffering. It has not helped that positions of social prestige in Chicontla and Patla—teachers, doctors, merchants, priests, landowners—are dominated by nonindigenous Mexicans. The fact that the Totonac parents reproduced these distinctions in their discourses without challenging them shows the degree to which the beliefs have become naturalized (Kroskrity 1998) and reveals a tacit acceptance of their inferior status.  Through a process of recursiveness (Gal and Irvine 1995), the parents projected their social inferiority to their language, commonly referring to it as a dialecto ‘dialect’, a widespread term in Mexico for an indigenous language to signal that it lacks the prestige of an idioma ‘language’ like Spanish (Hill and Hill 1986; Sicoli 2011; De Korne 2017). Mestizos have not disabused them of this belief, as illustrated in the earlier example of teachers scolding children for speaking their language, equating it with the unintelligible chirping of birds (“you sound like parakeets”). As a result of such reactions, being heard speaking Totonac, especially in public, is considered cause for embarrassment: “a lot of people are ashamed to speak Totonac, they’re ashamed, they say, I don’t want to show that I speak it, because that person is a person of society” (GAM; note how he describes nonindigenous people). Instead, many Totonac switch to Spanish in the presence of others, because they feel “proud” (CFM) of their linguistic ability and want to dissociate themselves from their indigenous origins.6 This practice reveals an iconizing (Gal and Irvine 1995) or essentialist language ideology, similar to Woolard’s (2008) ideology of authenticity, both of which reflect the idea that you are what you speak. Although there are other markers of indigenous identity such dark skin color and low economic status (Messing 2007), language remains the most conspicuous and most unambiguous index of identity. Thus, many Totonac believe that if they are heard speaking Spanish, they will not be seen as indio.  Outsiders are not expected to learn Totonac, not because the Totonac wish to keep it as a marker of in-group identity, but because of the low opinion they have of it. LVN explained that she did not teach her son her language because her spouse was nonindigenous, even though it would not have been unreasonable for her spouse to learn Totonac, seeing as the family was living in Chicontla; for example, the Tektiteko community discussed by Garzon (1992) would insist that in-marrying spouses learn the local language to avoid jokes and teasing. The following anecdote highlights the juxtaposition between indigenous and mestizo that I observed time and time again.For me, it seemed strange there once, the principal of the school ran into me in Mexico City, there in the bus terminal, where many speak only Spanish, he came from those, it seems, he went to Europe, he arrived at the bus terminal, and as I had gone to work in construction, . . . well, he ran into me there, and it surprised me that he was acknowledging me where there were a lot of people, [End Page 169] and he comes directly to where I was, and he said, “What’s up, hi, how are you?” and soon he starts to speak to me in Totonac, and he was dressed up in a suit, in a tie, well-dressed like this, everyone was surprised.[PSM]It is worthwhile to examine how PSM portrayed the principal, a nonindigenous Mexican, as someone who is worldly, having traveled to Europe, and also well-off, being able to afford a nice suit and tie. By describing the principal in this way, PSM positioned himself as the opposite, an unsophisticated, poor laborer. The inferiority of the indigenous identity is further made salient by the astonished reaction, both from PSM and reportedly from others present, to the principal’s open acknowledgment that PSM was a personal acquaintance, as the expectation would have been for him to snub someone like that. Even more surprisingly, the principal switched to speaking in Totonac, in public no less, thereby demonstrating to all that he considered PSM an equal. The whole situation seemed to have struck a chord with PSM, who spent almost three minutes recounting the episode to me, as it ran completely counter to his expectations.  It would be unfair to say that the parents showed no attachment whatsoever to their language. Many of them acknowledged, at least in their conversations with me, that Totonac is the language of their ancestors, and as such, it is part of who they are, “an inheritance that we’ve received from our grandparents” (GAM), “the legitimate speech” (PSM) of their family. Much as they seek to shun their indigenous origins, they recognized that they cannot fully escape their heritage. Nonetheless, this acknowledgment does not lessen their feelings of inferiority, nor does it change their language practices. As Sallabank pointed out, strong views about the role of language as part of one’s identity “can be expressed without apparently noticing the irony that language shift would not happen if speakers’ attachment to their ancestral language were really the overriding factor in their identity and the prime motivation in their linguistic behavior” (2013:77). Such contradictions in their beliefs underline the tensions that can occur between one’s sense of self and the pressures exerted by the social circumstances that treat one’s heritage not as cause for celebration but as grounds for discrimination.4.3. “No longer are there people as dumb as we were”: discourses about the pastThe Western emphasis on modernity, defined by technological advancement and material wealth, has meant that indigenous ways of life that eschew such trappings are often viewed as backward (cf. Messing 2007).7 The Totonac parents in Chicontla and Patla also share this belief, as seen in the way they referred to the past in comparison to the present.Before, people lived, people were very poor, very ignorant, they didn’t know anything . . . they began to send teachers, they began to study, little by little they knew more . . . those who planted corn, chiles, they began to plant coffee . . . people began to have a little bit of money . . . and then they began to [End Page 170] open their eyes more and more . . . no longer are there people as dumb as we were when we grew up.[LVN]LVN’s narrative portrays their life prior to the 1970s as one marked by poverty and ignorance, until the improvements in education and the economy led them to “open their eyes” to the ways of the modern world. Such depictions of their past life are clearly oversimplified and disregard the rich culture, the resources, and the wealth of knowledge that the Totonac must have had for centuries prior to the arrival of the Europeans when they dominated a swath of east-central Mexico known as Totonacapan. Their acceptance of Western ideals has led them to “erase” (Gal and Irvine 1995), or overlook, their long history because such facts run counter to the negative perception of their indigenous identity.  The metaphor of blindness that LVN used pervades the discourses about the past. In the following passage, LBS used the adjective cerrado ‘closed’ twice to describe what the community was like when no one could speak Spanish.If you can read [Spanish] but you don’t know what that word there says, well, that’s where they failed, those poor people, yes, and that’s how we were, poor us, whose eyes were very closed . . . many [bad] things happened to us before because many couldn’t speak Spanish, poor them, they could only stand there watching, yes, because this little town, well, was very closed, no, no one who could speak Spanish.[LBS]The reference to closedness depicts their past life as a barrier to participation in contemporary society. The implication is not that modern developments were withheld from them, but that they were the ones incapable of accessing them because they could not speak Spanish, hence LBS’s self-portrayal as pitiful (“poor us”) and LVN’s use of the word “dumb” (tonto) in the first quote. References to fear (miedo) also dominate descriptions of the past, when speakers could not communicate in Spanish.I’m no longer afraid of those who are there [in the government office], I’ve gotten the knack [of speaking Spanish], everyone knows me, I get there and I speak to them, and before, no, I couldn’t greet them, like, good day or what are they doing or how are they, no, I couldn’t say anything, right, I didn’t know anything, right, but now, now I understand well, I go up to whomever, and they come to my house as you come, we are no longer afr[aid], we are no longer ashamed to speak to educated people [las gentes que saben, lit., ‘the people who know’].[RMM]Note the contrast between the past, marked by fear, shame, and ignorance, and the present, where RMM exudes confidence and sees himself as a peer of “the people who know.” At no point did I encounter a discourse of nostalgia like that reported in other communities (e.g., Hill 1991): there is clearly no desire among the Totonac parents I spoke with to return to their past way of life. [End Page 171]4.4. “You cannot explain it well in Spanish because you speak Totonac”: discourses about language acquisitionOne of the justifications that parents gave for not teaching Totonac to their children is the fear that knowing two languages will cause confusion.And this [knowing Totonac] breaks down the language [Spanish] because, you no longer explain it the same way in Spanish because you speak Totonac and you speak Spanish, you speak more Totonac than Spanish, therefore you can no longer explain it well in Spanish because you speak a lot of Totonac.[LVN]This idea likely stems from their own difficulties with learning Spanish as a second language, which they blamed on their knowledge of Totonac (cf. Field 2009). Therefore, in order to avoid the confusion that LVN described, children should only be taught one language so that they do not end up speaking “half and half” (Rindstedt and Aronsson 2002:732). The belief that bilingualism is “onerous” (Dorian 1998:11) and that “a conscious exposure to both codes will only result in imperfect acquisition of both languages” (Reynolds 2009:226) is certainly not specific to these parents and has even been reported among language activists (Sallabank 2013). The myth is reinforced by teachers who not only insist that parents speak Spanish to their children, but that they also stop speaking Totonac so as not to interfere with the acquisition of the dominant language. This monoglossic ideology (García 2009) emphasizes “one-to-one mappings of language to culture, language to nation, and language to individual” (Sicoli 2011:171) and places parents in the difficult position of having to choose which language to transmit to their children. The obvious choice is Spanish because of its social and economic capital.  Furthermore, parents are aware that a basic proficiency in Spanish is not sufficient because speaking Spanish “with irregularities” is characteristic of the stereotypical indigenous Mexican (Martínez Casas 2014:1413) and is thus a social liability. For example, one of the mothers in De Korne described speaking a mix of Spanish and Zapotec as a sure sign of being “naco” (2017:44), a derogatory term meaning ‘uneducated’, often in reference to indigenous peoples. Therefore, it is important for parents that their children pass for native speakers—the iconizing language ideology mentioned earlier that equates how you speak with who you are. From their own experiences, parents remembered how difficult it was to learn another language as an adult: “my tongue would get tangled up, if you didn’t speak it from the time you were little, you speak it as an adult, you don’t have this, you don’t have the pronunciation right” (GAM). Logically, then, Spanish must be learned from infancy if one wants to sound like a native speaker.  The choice of Spanish as the sole language of transmission was thus not so much due to the concern that learning both Totonac and Spanish would be an impossible task, but to the assumption that their simultaneous acquisition would jeopardize the children’s ability to speak a nativelike Spanish. The [End Page 172] emphasis on acquiring a normative variety of Spanish, as opposed to a nonstandard español indígena ‘indigenous Spanish’ ( Guerrero Galván and San Giacomo 2014), is often overlooked in analyses of parental discourses, mistakenly suggesting a negative view of bilingualism in general. For instance, Garzon simply states that Tektiteko parents were convinced that the use of the Mayan language “would inhibit their children’s ability to acquire proficient Spanish” (1992:57), without highlighting the importance of the adjective “proficient”. In fact, the parents I spoke to were open to the idea of learning multiple languages, including English, and agreed that it was beneficial for their children to know Totonac—so long as it did not affect the acquisition of Spanish. For this reason, GMM stated that “it’s better that they learn Totonac as adults than Spanish, because it’s difficult to learn Spanish as an adult instead of as a child.”  The emphasis on Spanish over Totonac is bolstered by the belief, expressed by a few parents, that Totonac is harder to learn than Spanish, although they were unable to specify the source of difficulty. McGraw (2019) noted a similar belief among the Totonac parents in Ozelonacaxtla, which seemed to be related to the difficulty of reading and writing the indigenous language due to the lack of a standardized system. In addition, my suggestion that their language may disappear if children do not speak it failed to resonate with the parents “because the children are accustomed to it. . . . We won’t forget it as long as, um, because everyone speaks Totonac” (AFM).8 This response is reminiscent of Dauenhauer and Dauenhauer’s notion of a “genetic fallacy” (1998:84) whereby children are assumed to naturally acquire the language by dint of being Totonac, which only further justifies the choice of Spanish as the language of transmission.4.5. “You can’t force someone to do something they don’t like”: discourses about parentingAlongside the idea that children should only be taught one language is the absence of an “impact belief” (De Houwer 1999:83), the idea that parents have influence over their children’s language behavior. The Totonac parents expressed frustration over the uninterested response they received when they talked to their children in Totonac: “they don’t like it [laughs], all my daughters almost don’t, they just listen like this, and if you talk to them they just say ‘mm’” (AVV). Moreover, parents did not see themselves playing an active role in language socialization. When asked whether he wanted his children to learn Totonac, GAM replied that “they don’t have any desire to learn anymore. . . . Because, as they say, you can’t force someone to do something they don’t like.” LCV even defended the parents and blamed the children for their lack of effort: “the parents do want to because there are some who do speak Totonac to their children. What happens is that it’s the kids, it doesn’t stick.” Children are portrayed as headstrong and unmotivated, and parents feel that they are powerless in the face of their children’s obstinacy.  While respect for individual autonomy is an integral part of some Native American cultures (e.g., Bunte 2009), I have not observed this belief at play in [End Page 173] other aspects of parenting in Chicontla and Patla. Rather, it appears to be a pretext for not speaking Totonac to their children, as the parents’ permissiveness only applies to that language. In fact, GMM recalled explicitly reprimanding her children for not answering her in Spanish: “I started [to speak Spanish] with my children, and now what happens with them, why don’t they answer me [in Spanish]. And I said to them, and why don’t you answer me the way I talk to you. Again in Totonac. What am I going to do with you. Sometimes I scolded them.” The unidirectionality of the impact belief highlights its place as part of a larger discourse that equates the indigenous identity with inferiority, allowing parents to claim the inability to force their children to learn Totonac while simultaneously pressuring them to learn Spanish.  The stark contrast between the two sets of associations shows ideological erasure (Gal and Irvine 1995) at work, in which contradictory facts are ignored, leading to a black-and-white opposition where the Upper Necaxa Totonac language is linked to all that is bad, while the Spanish language is linked to all that is good. Unlike other communities where the ideological division between the languages is less absolute—for example, in the Mexicano communities in Hill and Hill (1986), Spanish is associated both with elevated usage and with [End Page 174] vulgarity and drunkenness—there does not seem to be a middle ground here. In the parents’ view, Upper Necaxa Totonac is indexical of the worst things they remember: poverty, shame, ignorance, suffering, confusion. The one positive attribute they expressed, that the Upper Necaxa Totonac language is part of their heritage, is drowned out in a sea of negative associations that distorts a potential source of pride into a social liability. It matters little that their language is part of who they are when they desire to dissociate themselves from that very identity.  The process of language shift in Chicontla and Patla clearly cannot be attributed simply to discrimination, the cause for it that I commonly hear mentioned in Mexico. There is no doubt that centuries of European dominance have contributed greatly to the negative self-perceptions of the Totonac parents. However, the act of internalizing the colonial ideologies, as well as the absence of a counterdiscourse, points to a degree of complicity on the part of the parents as well. As Sallabank noted, negative attitudes are “both outcome and cause of language shift” (2013:66). The decision by parents to withhold transmission of Upper Necaxa Totonac is driven simultaneously by the discriminatory ideologies of the dominant group (i.e., linguicide) and by the acceptance of these ideologies by the parents themselves (i.e., language suicide). As McNulty (2018) argues, these should be considered cooccurring forces rather than mutually exclusive processes.  The question remains as to why the Totonac parents would accept the hegemonic view of indigenous peoples as inferior. Their reaction can be understood if we consider their lived experiences, which have been marked by suffering due to poverty resulting from a poor education, the lack of economic opportunities, and social discrimination. Although nonindigenous Mexicans also suffer from these disadvantages, the social disparity in Mexico tends to fall along racial lines as a legacy of colonial divisions, resulting in the ideological equation of poverty with indigenous identity. The overarching concern that underlies the parental discourses is that their children be able to survive and meet their basic needs with little difficulty. According to Maslow’s (1987) hierarchy of needs, lower-level physiological and safety needs, such as food and shelter, often take precedence over higher-level emotional ones, such as a feeling of belonging and respect by others. I would add that the avoidance of discrimination should also be considered a lower-level need, as discriminatory acts can pose a threat to one’s physical safety as well as one’s emotional well-being. The parents see their own situation as deficient due to the lack of opportunities in the communities, and therefore, they look outwards in search of a better future for their children (cf. Garzon 1992). This perspective means that knowledge of Spanish, the language of the outside world, becomes a necessary condition for satisfying one’s needs, whereas Upper Necaxa Totonac is seen as an obstacle for survival.  Maslow argued that until lower-level needs are satisfied through improved social conditions, higher-level needs cannot be met. Concerns about preserving [End Page 175] the Totonac heritage are unimportant if you do not have enough to eat or a safe place to live. This explains the ideological disjuncture in parental discourses: while they were happy to acknowledge that Upper Necaxa Totonac is the language of their ancestors, they see nothing wrong with not transmitting it to future generations. Rindstedt and Aronsson noted a similar contradiction in their work in Ecuador that they termed the “ethnic revitalization paradox,” (2002:725) where parents expressed a strong pro-Quichua discourse but favored Spanish in actual speaking practices. The split between the notion of language as a symbol and the notion of language as communicative practice (Edwards and Chisholm 1987) suggests that the primary motivator of parental language practices in Chicontla and Patla is not emotional, but pragmatic. Note that “pragmatic” does not solely mean “economic”; parents are concerned not only about their children’s financial well-being, but also their personal safety and their freedom to do what they want, go where they wish, and speak to whomever they encounter—hence the frequent association between knowing Spanish and the ability to take care of oneself (defenderse). By looking at the full range of parental discourses related to language, we see that attachment to their ancestral language has minimal influence, as it barely registers among the different discourses and may have only appeared because of the researcher’s presence. Instead, parents preferred to speak about their conceptions of progress and modernity, their beliefs about language acquisition, and the essentialist idea that equates speaking with being, all of which feed into the ideology of the inferiority of the indigenous identity for survival in the modern world.  Given their overarching concern for their children’s future, an appeal to the symbolic value of the language would likely do little to convince parents to continue its transmission. While official bodies in Mexico, such as the National Institute for Indigenous Languages (Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas or INALI), have been actively raising general awareness of indigenous languages and cultures, they do not address the real reason why parents are not teaching their language to their children—survival. As Blommaert commented, “declaring languages equal does not make their speakers equal in real societies, because far more than language is at play” (2001:138). The symbolic valuation of indigenous languages, though well-intentioned, does little to change the everyday lived realities of the speakers “who continue to lack basic material resources at the bottom of the economic hierarchy, despite being rich in the kinds of symbolic capital celebrated by the politics of recognition” (De Korne 2017:49).9 As long as they continue to struggle to obtain food, shelter, and personal safety, parents see no logical reason to teach their children a language that does not help them meet their basic needs, especially when combined with the mistaken belief that the simultaneous acquisition of two languages is detrimental. It is often the case that those who hold a more positive stance toward their language are also those who are in a more comfortable socioeconomic position, leading Cavanaugh to conclude that “socioeconomic prosperity, [End Page 176] then, affords sociolinguistic security” (2004:34). Until the Totonac parents feel assured that their children’s well-being is secure, they will continue to say, “I don’t want them to be like me.