plants
Review

To Fight or to Grow: The Balancing Role of Ethylene in Plant
Abiotic Stress Responses
Hao Chen, David A. Bullock, Jr., Jose M. Alonso and Anna N. Stepanova *
Program in Genetics, Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC 27695, USA; hchen22@ncsu.edu (H.C.); dabullo2@ncsu.edu (D.A.B.J.); jmalonso@ncsu.edu (J.M.A.)
* Correspondence: atstepan@ncsu.edu

Abstract: Plants often live in adverse environmental conditions and are exposed to various stresses,
such as heat, cold, heavy metals, salt, radiation, poor lighting, nutrient deficiency, drought, or flooding.
To adapt to unfavorable environments, plants have evolved specialized molecular mechanisms that
serve to balance the trade-off between abiotic stress responses and growth. These mechanisms enable
plants to continue to develop and reproduce even under adverse conditions. Ethylene, as a key
growth regulator, is leveraged by plants to mitigate the negative effects of some of these stresses
on plant development and growth. By cooperating with other hormones, such as jasmonic acid
(JA), abscisic acid (ABA), brassinosteroids (BR), auxin, gibberellic acid (GA), salicylic acid (SA), and
cytokinin (CK), ethylene triggers defense and survival mechanisms thereby coordinating plant growth
and development in response to abiotic stresses. This review describes the crosstalk between ethylene
and other plant hormones in tipping the balance between plant growth and abiotic stress responses.
Keywords: ethylene; abiotic stress; hormone crosstalk; growth and defense tradeoff

Citation: Chen, H.; Bullock, D.A., Jr.;
Alonso, J.M.; Stepanova, A.N. To
Fight or to Grow: The Balancing Role
of Ethylene in Plant Abiotic Stress
Responses. Plants 2022, 11, 33.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
plants11010033
Academic Editor: Irina Vaseva
Received: 2 December 2021
Accepted: 19 December 2021
Published: 23 December 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
Abiotic stresses such as salinity, heat, cold, drought, and flooding have detrimental
effects on plant yield and can lead to complete crop failure. In nature, various plants
have evolved an array of fascinating mechanisms to rapidly detect changing conditions
and respond to the challenge by altering their growth and development, thus enabling
adaptation to the unstable environment. The severe phenotypic defects in plant growth
and fecundity commonly observed in unfavorable environmental conditions are the consequence of altered developmental programs that plants adopt in an attempt to survive
and reproduce under these suboptimal conditions [1]. Stress adaptation usually involves
trade-offs between optimal growth and maximal stress tolerance, with stress-tolerant plant
varieties typically displaying lower growth rates and productivity under favorable conditions [2,3]. Thus, the focus of modern breeding efforts and biotechnological innovations on
minimizing the growth/defense trade-offs and leveraging those natural stress response
mechanisms without eliciting a yield penalty will be key to securing a stable future food
supply under the ever-changing climate.
One promising factor that may prove crucial to developing effective solutions for
uncoupling plant growth from defense is ethylene. Ethylene is an endogenous, gaseous
plant hormone that is involved not only in a variety of physiological and developmental
processes, from regulating organ growth to inducing fruit ripening, but also in multiple
stress responses. In fact, endogenous ethylene production in plants is influenced by several
biotic and abiotic factors that affect many of the same physiological and developmental
processes that ethylene is known to regulate [4], raising the possibility of rationally manipulating ethylene biosynthesis, signaling, or response to trigger plant adaptation to stress
without eliciting growth arrest.
The biological function of ethylene was first characterized in dark-grown pea seedlings
that, in the presence of this hormone, display a characteristic set of morphological changes

The biological function of ethylene was first characterized in dark-grown pea
seed
lings that, in the presence of this hormone, display a characteristic set of morphological
changes known as the triple response [4]. In the model system Arabidopsis thaliana that
proved
in the identification
the molecular
for ethknowninstrumental
as the triple response
[4]. In the modelofsystem
Arabidopsismachinery
thaliana thatrequired
proved instruylene
biosynthesis,
perception,
and
signaling,
the ethylene-triggered
triplebiosynthesis,
response conmental
in the identification
of the
molecular
machinery
required for ethylene
perception,
and signaling,
the ethylene-triggered
triplehook
response
consists
of the
hypocotyl
sists
of hypocotyl
swelling, exaggeration
of the apical
curvature,
and
inhibition
exaggeration
of the apical
hook curvature,
and the[5].
inhibition
of hypocotyl
and
of swelling,
hypocotyl
and root elongation
in dark-grown
seedlings
This robust
triple response
root
elongation
in
dark-grown
seedlings
[5].
This
robust
triple
response
phenotype
phenotype has served as the basis for ethylene mutant identification that ultimatelyhas
led to
as the
for ethylene mutant
identification
that ultimately
to the cloning and
theserved
cloning
andbasis
characterization
of critical
ethylene-related
genes led
[5–7].
characterization
of critical ethylene-related
genes
[5–7].
Ethylene biosynthesis
in plants involves
three
enzyme-catalyzed steps (Figure 1A).
Ethylene biosynthesis in plants involves three enzyme-catalyzed steps (Figure 1A).
Methionine is first converted to S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM) by SAM synthetases, then
Methionine is first converted to S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM) by SAM synthetases, then
to to
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic
acid (ACC) by ACC synthases (ACS) and, finally, to
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) by ACC synthases (ACS) and, finally,
ethylene
by
ACC
oxidases
(ACO)
[8–11].
Ethylene
biosynthesis
is isnot
to ethylene by ACC oxidases (ACO) [8–11].
Ethylene
biosynthesis
notspecific
specifictotoany
anyone
plant
tissue
or
organ,
and
it
is
believed
that
most,
if
not
all,
plant
cells
can
produce
one plant tissue or organ, and it is believed that most, if not all, plant cells can produceethylene
[6]. Under
favorable
growth
conditions,
overall
ethylene
production
ethylene
[6]. Under
favorable
growth
conditions,
overall
ethylene
productionisiskept
keptatataalow
level,
but
during
specific
developmental
processes
and
in
response
to
certain
abiotic
low level, but during specific developmental processes and in response to certain abiotic
stresses,ethylene
ethylenebiosynthesis
biosynthesis can be
stresses,
be rapidly
rapidlyinduced
induced[12,13].
[12,13].

Figure
1. Schematic overview of ethylene biosynthesis and signaling in Arabidopsis. (A) Ethylene
Figure 1. Schematic overview of ethylene biosynthesis and signaling in Arabidopsis. (A) Ethylene
biosynthetic pathway. Amino acid methionine is converted into hormone ethylene by three families
biosynthetic pathway. Amino acid methionine is converted into hormone ethylene by three families
of enzymes, SAM synthetases that produce S-adenosyl-methionine out of methionine, ACC synof enzymes, SAM synthetases that produce S-adenosyl-methionine out of methionine, ACC synthases that make 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, and ACC oxidases that generate ethylene.
thases that make 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, and ACC oxidases that generate ethylene.
Ethylene then diffuses out of and into plant cells. (B) Ethylene signaling pathway in the absence of
Ethylene then diffuses out of and into plant cells. (B) Ethylene signaling pathway in the absence
ethylene. Ethylene receptors ETR1, ETR2, ERS1, ERS2, and EIN4 localized in the ER membrane acof ethylene. Ethylene receptors ETR1, ETR2, ERS1, ERS2, and EIN4 localized in the ER membrane
tivate CTR1 kinase, which in turn phosphorylates the C-terminal end of EIN2 (EIN2-CEND) and
activate CTR1 kinase, which in turn phosphorylates the C-terminal end of EIN2 (EIN2-CEND) and
turns EIN2 off. The mRNAs for F-box proteins EBF1 and EBF2 are translated and target the master
turns EIN2 off. The mRNAs for F-box proteins EBF1 and EBF2 are translated and target the master
transcriptional
regulators of ethylene signaling, EIN3 and EIL1, to proteasomes for protein turnover,
transcriptional
of ethylene signaling,
EIN3signaling
and EIL1,pathway
to proteasomes
protein turnover,
thus
preventing regulators
ethylene responses.
(C) Ethylene
in thefor
presence
of ethylene.
thus
preventing
ethylene
responses.
(C)
Ethylene
signaling
pathway
in
the
presence
of
ethylene.
Ethylene binding to the receptors shuts them off, CTR1 is inactivated, EIN2 is dephosphorylated
Ethylene
binding
the receptors
shuts thus
themreleasing
off, CTR1EIN2-CEND
is inactivated,
EIN2
is dephosphorylated
and
is cleaved
by antounknown
protease,
that
functions
in the cytoplasm
and
is
cleaved
by
an
unknown
protease,
thus
releasing
EIN2-CEND
that
functions
and in the nucleus. In the cytosol, EIN2-CEND recruits EBF1 and EBF2 mRNAs in
to the
thecytoplasm
P-bodies and
and intheir
the nucleus.
In theIncytosol,
EIN2-CEND
recruits EBF1
andor
EBF2
mRNAspotentiates
to the P-bodies
inhibits
translation.
the nucleus,
EIN2-CEND
directly
indirectly
the and
activity
their
translation.
In the nucleus,
EIN2-CENDofdirectly
or indirectly
potentiatesfactors
the activity
of inhibits
EIN3 and
EIL1.
Ethylene-triggered
stabilization
the EIN3/EIL1
transcription
leads to
EIN3 and EIL1.regulation
Ethylene-triggered
stabilization
of theincluding
EIN3/EIL1
transcription
factorsmembers
leads to of
theoftranscriptional
of multiple
target genes,
induction
of several
transcriptional
regulation
multiple target
genes,ofincluding
induction
of several
members
of that
thethe
ERF
gene family that
encodeoftranscription
factors
the second
tier of the
ethylene
response
the ERF gene
family that encode transcription
factors programs.
of the second
tier of the
ethylene response
propagate
the EIN3/EIL1-triggered
transcriptional
Positive
interactions
such asthat
activation,
production,
and stabilization are
representedprograms.
with linesPositive
that end
in an arrowhead
→. Negative
propagate
the EIN3/EIL1-triggered
transcriptional
interactions
such as activation,
interactions
such
as
inactivation
and
repression
are
represented
by
lines
that
end
in
a
hammerhead
production, and stabilization are represented with lines that end in an arrowhead →. Negative
⊣. interactions
Images were
created
with BioRender.
such
as inactivation
and repression are represented by lines that end in a hammerhead a.
Images were created with BioRender.

Ethylene can freely diffuse through plant membranes reaching the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where perception takes place and triggers a signaling cascade that ends in the
transcriptional regulation of ethylene-responsive genes in the nucleus [14]; Figure 1B,C.
The ethylene receptors ETHYLENE RESPONSE SENSOR1 (ERS1), ERS2, ETHYLENE
RESPONSE1 (ETR1), ETR2 and ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE4 (EIN4) in Arabidopsis are
negative regulators of the pathway that, in the absence of ethylene, activate the CONSTITUTIVE TRIPLE RESPONSE1 (CTR1) protein [15,16]. CTR1 is a kinase that phosphorylates
and inhibits the positive regulator of ethylene signaling, EIN2, an ER-localized membrane
protein [16]. In the presence of ethylene, upon ethylene binding, the receptors and CTR1
become inactivated, EIN2 gets dephosphorylated and cleaved, and its released C-terminus
(CEND) enters the nucleus as well as moves to P-bodies [17,18]. In the nucleus, EIN2-CEND
directly or indirectly promotes the activity of EIN3 and EIN3-LIKE1 (EIL1), the transcriptional master-regulators of ethylene signaling. In the cytosol, the EIN2-CEND represses the
translation of EIN3 BINDING F-BOX PROTEIN1 (EBF1) and EBF2 transcripts by directly or
indirectly binding to their 30 -untranslated regions (30 -UTRs) and moving along with these
transcripts to the P-bodies [17,18]. EBF1 and EBF2 are F-box proteins that target EIN3/EIL1
for proteasomal degradation [19,20]. In the presence of ethylene, the translation of EBF1
and EBF2 is inhibited, and EIN3 and EIL1 are stabilized and regulate the transcription of
ethylene-responsive target genes, such as ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTORs (ERFs) [21,22].
ERFs are AP2-domain-containing transcription factors (TFs) that regulate genes involved in diverse biological processes such as growth, development, hormone, and stress
responses through several mechanisms, including transcriptional and post-translational
control [23–25]. Different subclasses of ERFs have specific DNA binding preferences [26].
For example, a subset of related ERFs recognizes Dehydration-Responsive or C-Repeat
Element (DRE/CRT) with A/GCCGAC core sequence found in stress-responsive genes to
regulate drought, cold and heat abiotic stress responses. Through direct binding to target
gene promoters, ERFs can either activate or repress target gene expression [27,28].
In Arabidopsis, ethylene has been shown to inhibit hypocotyl and root elongation
in dark-grown seedlings, but to promote hypocotyl growth in light-grown plants [29].
Thus, by cooperating with different environmental signals, ethylene can differentially
regulate growth to mediate plant adaptation to variable environments [30]. Not surprisingly,
endogenous ethylene levels and the transcript abundance of ethylene signaling genes are
rapidly upregulated in response to multiple abiotic stresses. For example, flooding, heat,
shade, heavy metals, salt, osmotic, drought, and cold stress conditions have all been
described to trigger ethylene synthesis and increased expression of ethylene pathway
genes [31–37]; Table 1.
Correspondingly, ethylene presence affects the plant tolerance to these abiotic stresses [56]
through multiple levels of regulation (Figure 2). For example, ethylene increases the plant
tolerance to salt stress by altering the physiological and developmental activities of plants,
e.g., by promoting adventitious root formation, regulating stem and petiole growth, and
controlling stomatal aperture [57]. In response to flooding and heavy metal stresses,
ethylene cooperates with the reactive oxygen species (ROS) response pathway to modulate
plant metabolism and antioxidant system to promote plant survival [58]. Furthermore,
ethylene balances photosynthesis and abiotic stress response to fine-tune plant growth and
development under unfavorable conditions [59,60]; Figure 2.
To help plants deal with abiotic stress, ethylene engages in a sophisticated crosstalk
with multiple other phytohormones to enable plant adaptation [1,31,60,61]. With the explosion in the volume of research studies published in the field of plant biology in the
past 30 years, it comes as no surprise that different plant hormones have been found to
engage and cooperate in multiple physiological processes, including responses to abiotic
stresses [61,62]. Some of this hormone-hormone crosstalk occurs at the level of transcription and involves the coordinated action of regulators for several hormones. For instance, in Arabidopsis exposed to cold stress, JA and GA pathway regulators JASMONATE
ZIM-DOMAIN (JAZ) and DELLA proteins physically interact with EIN3 to activate C-

REPEAT/DEHYDRATION-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING FACTOR (CBF) TF genes
to enhance cold tolerance, but CBFs can also be induced by ABA [63,64]. This review
describes the current state of knowledge on the interactions of ethylene with other plant
hormones in response to abiotic stress to balance the trade-off between investing in growth
and protecting the plant against stress-induced damage.
Table 1. Effects of different abiotic stress factors on transcript abundance of ethylene biosynthetic
and signaling genes in Arabidopsis.
Stress Type
Drought stress

Regulation

Ethylene Biosynthetic Genes

Up

ACS8, 12 [37,38]

Down

ACO2, 4, 5, ACS10, 11 [38,39]

Up

ACS2, 6, 7, 9, 11 [40,41]

Flooding/hypoxia stress

Osmotic stress

Heavy metal stress
Salt stress
Heat stress

Cold stress
Heavy metal stress

Ethylene Signaling Genes

EIN3 [42]

Down
Up
ACS7, ACO2 [43,44]
ETR2, ERS1, CTR1, EIN3/EIL1, EBF1/2 [44,45]
Down
ETR1, EIN4, EIN2, EBF1/2 [51]
Down
ETR1, EIN2 [46,47]
Up
ACS2, 5, 6, ACO1, 2 [52–54]
EIN2 [55]
Up
ACS2, 6, 7, 11, ACO2, 4 [47,48]
EIN3 [49]
Down
Down
ETR1, EIN2 [45,46]
Correspondingly,
ethylene
presence
affects
the
plant
tolerance
to these
abiotic
Up
ACS6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, ACO2, 4 [43,50]
ERS2, ETR2,
EIN3 [50]
stresses [56] through multiple levels of regulation (Figure 2). For example, ethylene inDown the plant tolerance
ACS2, 4, to
5, salt
ACO1,
3 [50]
ERS1, and
CTR1,
EIN2 [50]
creases
stress
by altering the physiological
developmental
activities
of
plants,
e.g.,
by
promoting
adventitious
root
formation,
regulating
Up
ACS2, 11, ACO2 [41,47]
EIN3 [51] stem and
petiole growth, and controlling stomatal aperture [57]. In response to flooding and heavy
Down
ETR1, EIN4, EIN2, EBF1/2 [51]
metal stresses, ethylene cooperates with the reactive oxygen species (ROS) response pathUpto modulate ACS2,
5, 6, ACO1, and
2 [52–54]
way
plant metabolism
antioxidant system to promoteEIN2
plant[55]
survival [58].
Furthermore,
ethylene
balances
photosynthesis
and
abiotic
stress
response
to fine-tune
Down
plant growth and development under unfavorable conditions [59,60]; Figure 2.

Figure 2. Simplified overview of the role of ethylene in mediating the tradeoff between abiotic stress

Figure 2. Simplified overview of the role of ethylene in mediating the tradeoff between abiotic
and growth in plants. Abiotic stress induces ethylene biosynthesis and triggers ethylene accumulastress
growth
in perception
plants. Abiotic
stress result
induces
ethylene
biosynthesis
and triggers
tion inand
plants.
Ethylene
and signaling
in multiple
physiological
responses
that not ethylene
accumulation
in plants.
perception
and signaling
result in multiple
physiological
only inhibit plant
growth,Ethylene
but also confer
stress tolerance
that maximizes
plant survival
in adverseresponses
conditions.
Positive
interactions
such as
activation,
production,
and stabilization
are represented
that
not only
inhibit
plant growth,
but
also confer
stress tolerance
that maximizes
plant survival
with
lines that
end in an arrowhead
→. Negativesuch
interactions
such as inactivation
repression
in
adverse
conditions.
Positive interactions
as activation,
production,and
and
stabilization are
are represented by lines that end in a hammerhead ⊣. The background image of balance was created
represented
with lines that end in an arrowhead →. Negative interactions such as inactivation and
with BioRender.
repression are represented by lines that end in a hammerhead a. The background image of balance
was created
BioRender.
To helpwith
plants
deal with abiotic stress, ethylene engages in a sophisticated crosstalk
with multiple other phytohormones to enable plant adaptation [1,31,60,61]. With the explosion in the volume of research studies published in the field of plant biology in the past
30 years, it comes as no surprise that different plant hormones have been found to engage
and cooperate in multiple physiological processes, including responses to abiotic stresses
[61,62]. Some of this hormone-hormone crosstalk occurs at the level of transcription and
involves the coordinated action of regulators for several hormones. For instance, in Ara-

2. Ethylene and JA
JA is a fatty-acid-derived hormone that was named after Jasminum grandiflorum’s
jasmine oil [65]. JA was identified for its stress-related functions and the ability to regulate
plant growth and development, with its activity being partially dependent on JA interactions with ethylene [66]. JA biosynthesis has recently been reviewed in detail [67,68]. In
brief, JAs are predominantly synthesized through two chloroplasts-based pathways: the octadecane route that uses linolenic acid to produce 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid (OPDA) and the
hexadecane pathway that converts hexadecatrienoic acid (16:3) to dinor-oxo-phytodienoic
acid (dn-OPDA) [69]. These OPDAs are subsequently oxidized into JA in peroxisomes, and
the JA is then conjugated with isoleucine (Ile) to form JA-Ile in the cytoplasm. JA-Ile is the
bioactive form of JA which regulates plant development and environmental adaptation.
JA-Ile binds to the CORONATINE-INSENSITIVE1 (COI1) receptor, inducing the degradation of the JAZ proteins and releasing the MYC2 TF from the JAZ-MYC2 complex. MYC2
then triggers the expression of JA-responsive genes [69].
One of the best-understood points of crosstalk between ethylene and abiotic stressinduced signaling is the transcriptional regulation of stress-related genes by EIN3/EIL1
master-regulators that directly bind to and alter the expression of many TF genes implicated
in abiotic stress tolerance [70]. Some examples of such TF genes in Arabidopsis include
ERF1, SALT-INDUCED AND EIN3/EIL1-DEPENDENT1, and ETHYLENE AND SALT INDUCIBLE1 involved in salt stress response [71], RELATED TO AP2.2 (RAP2.2)/ERF73 and
RAP2.12 associated with flooding stress tolerance [72], MEDIATOR COMPLEX SUBUNIT16
(MED16) and MED25 participating in responses to nutrient deficiency [73], ERF95 and
ERF97 regulating heat stress tolerance [74], and CBF1, 2 and 3 controlling cold response [51].
Importantly, the transcription of some of the EIN3-regulated downstream TF genes is also
controlled by JA signaling. For example, ERF1 induction in Arabidopsis requires JA under
several abiotic stresses, such as drought, salt, and heat stress [75,76]. Through a ubiquitinmediated de-repression mechanism, JA signaling also regulates EIN3/EIL1 activities. In
light-grown Arabidopsis seedlings, JAZ proteins (JAZ1, 3, and 9) can physically interact
with EIN3/EIL1 and enhance EIN3/EIL1 binding to HISTONE DEACETYLASE6 (HDA6),
a histone tail modification enzyme that blocks transcription [77,78]. The resulting complex
that forms in the absence of JA inhibits EIN3/EIL1-mediated transcription [78,79]. Upon
JA treatment, JAZ degradation attenuates HDA6-EIN3/EIL1 association, thus activating
EIN3/EIL1 [78]. Multiple abiotic stresses enhance endogenous JA production, thereby
boosting JA levels in cells and promoting the release of EIN3/EIL1 from JAZ-HDA6 hijacking [78]. Further studies show that EIN3/EIL1 positively regulate JA-dependent root hair
development and thus enhance drought tolerance in Arabidopsis [80], whereas JAZ1 and
HDA6 are known to, vice versa, inhibit root hair growth and thus attenuate plant drought
tolerance in Arabidopsis and rice [81–84], which is consistent with the cooperative roles of
ethylene and JA in regulating plant drought tolerance and root hair development [85].
In addition to the collaborative effects of ethylene and JA on the activity of EIN3/EIL1
and their targets in Arabidopsis and rice seedlings, JA and ethylene can antagonistically regulate many abiotic stress genes in some contexts [86]. In etiolated Arabidopsis seedlings, JAactivated TFs MYC2, MYC3, and MYC4 can physically interact with EIN3/EIL1 and repress
their DNA binding ability, thereby reducing the expression of EIN3/EIL1-inducible target
genes [86,87]. For example, through this mechanism, the expression of EIN3-regulated
flooding stress genes is inhibited by MYC 2/3/4 [88]. Reciprocally, EIN3 can repress the
transcription of MYC2-controlled wounding-responsive genes [86]. This mutual inhibition
of MYC2 and EIN3 in Arabidopsis modulates the antagonistic effects of JA and ethylene,
thereby fine-tuning the expression of many stress-related ERFs [75,89,90]. One classical
example of the direct target of MYC2 and EIN3 that mediates responses to multiple abiotic
stresses is the TF gene ERF1 [75,89,90] antagonistically regulated by JA and ethylene at the
transcriptional level. Arabidopsis ERF1 controls the expression of multiple suites of genes
activated by JA, drought, salt, and heat [75,89]. In fact, ERF1-overexpressing plants have
been shown to have increased tolerance to drought, heat, and salt stress [89].

Besides this layer of transcriptional regulation, JA-triggered inhibition of the EIN3
protein function has also been described to take place at the post-transcriptional level in
Arabidopsis apical hook formation [86]. JA treatment decreases EIN3 and EIL1 protein
abundance in wild-type Arabidopsis plants, but not in the ebf1 ebf2 background [86]. Further mechanistic inquiry revealed that JA enhances the transcription of EBF1, and this
upregulation is diminished in the myc2 mutant [86]. Taken together, these observations
suggest that in Arabidopsis apical hooks, JA triggers EIN3/EIL1 degradation via MYC2mediated transcriptional induction of EBF1 [86]. However, it remains unknown if these
antagonistic actions of ethylene and JA signaling at the post-transcriptional level also take
place in response to abiotic stresses. Furthermore, the stability of EBF1/EBF2 in Arabidopsis is dependent on the RING-type E3 ligase SALT- AND DROUGHT-INDUCED RING
FINGER1 (SDIR1), which directly targets EBF1/EBF2 for ubiquitination and proteasomedependent degradation [91]. Accordingly, SDIR1 promotes drought tolerance and salt
sensitivity in Arabidopsis, and the SDIR1-mediated regulation of EBF1/EBF2 is fine-tuned
by temperature fluctuations [91,92].
As mentioned above, the cooperative and antagonistic regulation of ethylene and JA
crosstalk is largely dependent on the interaction of EIN3, JAZs, HDA, MYCs, and EBFs,
whose abundance is tightly controlled by endogenous ethylene and JA. For example, the
abundance of EIN3 in Arabidopsis is enhanced by high endogenous levels of ethylene and
repressed by high endogenous levels of JA [21,86]. The ethylene and JA production is, in
turn, controlled by several abiotic stress factors, with cold stress, for example, reducing
the levels of ethylene and enhancing the levels of JA [79]. Accordingly, the abundance
and interaction of the aforementioned proteins are altered in response to stress-induced
hormone level changes [81–87]. The relative concentrations of various protein complexes
differentially affect plant growth and stress tolerance, a phenomenon illustrated by the
JA-ethylene crosstalk mediated by JAZ, HDA, and EIN3 interactions in balancing root hair
development and drought tolerance [78,81]. In the future, building the JA- and ethylenemediated gene regulatory networks from protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions
with spatial and temporal resolution in response to specific stress factors would be critical
for a comprehensive understanding of the role of ethylene and JA crosstalk in abiotic stress
tolerance and plant growth and development.
3. Ethylene and ABA
ABA, whose name comes from “abscisin II” [93], is an isoprenoid plant hormone
synthesized through the plastidial 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate pathway. ABA
can be produced in nearly all plastid-containing cells and is transported by ABA transporters [94]. In the presence of ABA, soluble PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE1 (PYR1)/PYR1LIKE/REGULATORY COMPONENT OF ABA RECEPTOR proteins bind the hormone,
leading to the inhibition of ABI1-INSENSITIVE1 (ABI1) phosphatase. The ABA-PYR complex causes the accumulation of phosphorylated SNF1-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE2
(SnRK2) family, which in turn phosphorylates various target proteins, including ABARESPONSIVE ELEMENT-BINDING FACTORs, to trigger cellular responses [94]. In
the absence of ABA, ABI1 inhibits the action of SnRKs, thus switching off the ABA
signaling [94].
Abscisic acid is well known as a stress hormone for its role in alleviating abiotic stress
in plants [95]. Ethylene and ABA have been described to have antagonistic interactions,
influencing each other’s biosynthetic and signaling pathways [96]. Genetic evidence in
Arabidopsis suggests that the knockouts of ethylene biosynthesis and signaling genes result
in altered plant sensitivity to ABA and, accordingly, affect the ABA-dependent abiotic stress
tolerance in several developmental processes [43,46,97,98]. For example, the Arabidopsis
ACS7 loss-of-function mutant with reduced endogenous ethylene levels is hypersensitive to
ABA, accumulates higher levels of endogenous ABA, and displays enhanced salt tolerance
during seed germination and seedling growth [43,98]. However, the interactions between
ethylene and ABA in the regulation of salt tolerance are more complex and developmental

processes dependent. For instance, in Arabidopsis leaf development, the loss-of-function
mutations of EIN2 and EIN3 and gain-of-function mutations of ETR1 and EIN4 have been
shown to confer salt sensitivity, with these mutants accumulating higher endogenous ABA
levels [46,99–102], whereas the inactivation of CTR1 and EBF1/EBF2 leads to enhanced salt
tolerance and reduced ABA levels in Arabidopsis [102].
Another abiotic stress-sensitive process affected by the ethylene-ABA crosstalk is
stomatal opening and closure (Figure 3). ABA acts as the key regulator of stomatal closure to
ameliorate the effect of abiotic stress, such as drought [103]. Exogenous ethylene treatment
of different plant species, including Arabidopsis, tomato, carnation, and sunflower, inhibits
ABA- and stress-induced stomatal closure [104–107]. The inhibitory effect of ethylene on
ABA-regulated stomata activity stems from flavonol accumulation [108–110]. Flavonol
build-up under stress conditions is an EIN2-dependent process that represses ABA-induced
ROS production and stomatal closure in Arabidopsis [108–110]. Controversially, some
other studies found that ethylene can cause stomatal closure, resulting from the NADPH
oxidase AtRbohF-dependent H2 O2 production through the activation of the Gα protein
in Arabidopsis guard cells [109,110], Figure 3. The contradictory results for the effect
of ethylene on stomatal opening and closure may be due to differences in experimental
conditions, such as stress duration, stress strength, or the measured time point. In an
attempt to reconcile these findings and decipher the perplexing control of stomatal closure
by the ethylene-ABA crosstalk, a mathematical model that integrates all relevant signaling
components in Arabidopsis was constructed for guard cells using a continuous logical
modeling framework [111]. This model suggests that an increase in either ethylene or
ABA alone results in stomatal closure, whereas the presence of both hormones diminishes
stomatal closure.
The complexity in the regulation of stomatal closure via the reciprocal regulation of
ABA and ethylene biosynthesis has also been described. Plants overexpressing ethyleneinducible ERFs (AtERF1 in Arabidopsis, JERF1 in tobacco, TSRF1 in rice, and TaERF1
in Triticum aestivum) show enhanced expression of ABA biosynthetic genes and greater
endogenous ABA content, and thus result in stomatal closure and improved abiotic stress
tolerance [75,112–115]. Reciprocally, high ABA levels in Arabidopsis induce the expression
of the TF gene ABI4, and ABI4 protein in turn negatively regulates ethylene production by
repressing the transcription of ethylene biosynthesis genes ACS4 and ACS8 [116], Figure 3.
Consequently, high concentrations of ABA limit ethylene production in guard cells and
induce stomata closure [117]. The negative feedback loop coordinating the ethylene and
ABA levels could partially explain the early and late response of stomata actions in response
to abiotic stresses [111], Figure 3.
The antagonistic roles of ethylene and ABA have also been discovered in flooding
stress responses. To date, the role of ethylene in flooding stress tolerance has been wellstudied in rice and Polygonaceae species whose root systems grow under water submergence [118]. In rice, high concentrations of ABA inhibit shoot elongation [118]. Flooding
stress promotes the accumulation of ethylene in rice shoots and that extra ethylene inhibits ABA biosynthesis as well as further decreases ABA concentration by inducing the
breakdown of ABA into phaseic acid [119–121]. With the degradation of ABA, rapid shoot
elongation is promoted [120] and takes plants out of water, thus enabling them to escape
from flooding stress.
So far, we have shown that the antagonistic roles of ABA and ethylene are observed in
multiple abiotic stress responses. Likewise, ABA and ethylene interact antagonistically in
many processes of plant development and growth. For example, ABA negatively regulates
seed germination, seedling development, petiole angle, root quiescence center cell division
and differentiation, and lateral root emergence, whereas ethylene positively regulates all of
these ABA-inhibited processes [122–127]. The studies highlight some common downstream
regulatory modules, such as TFs, that are antagonistically controlled by ethylene and ABA,
and future experimental inquiries would further clarify the nature of this crosstalk and the
underlying mechanisms of regulation in balancing plant growth and abiotic stress tolerance.

The rich genetic resources available for interrogating ethylene and ABA pathways in model

plants Arabidopsis and rice, together with the clear transcriptional roadmaps downstream
of ethylene and ABA [128,129], will continue to fuel these important efforts.

Figure
model
of of
stomatal
closure
regulation
by crosstalk
between
ABA,
BR, BR,
and and
ethylene
in
Figure3.3.A A
model
stomatal
closure
regulation
by crosstalk
between
ABA,
ethylene
Arabidopsis. Endogenous ABA and ethylene accumulate in response to abiotic stress. The biosynin Arabidopsis. Endogenous ABA and ethylene accumulate in response to abiotic stress. The
thesis of ethylene is upregulated by BR but repressed by ABA due to the transcriptional regulation
biosynthesis of ethylene is upregulated by BR but repressed by ABA due to the transcriptional
of ACS genes. The ABA biosynthesis is upregulated by ethylene through MHZ4/5. ABA induces
regulation
of ACS
genes.
TheABI4
ABA protein,
biosynthesis
is upregulated
bytranscription
ethylene through
ABA
ABI4
transcript
levels
and the
in turn,
represses the
of theMHZ4/5.
ACS genes.
induces
ABI4
transcript
levels
and
the
ABI4
protein,
in
turn,
represses
the
transcription
of
the
ACS
Ethylene also regulates stomatal closure via two ROS-dependent pathways. One pathway is medigenes.
Ethylene
also
regulates
stomatal
closure
via
two
ROS-dependent
pathways.
One
pathway
ated by the ethylene-triggered activation of the Gα protein, which in turn promotes H2O2 production
mediated the
by the
ethylene-triggered
of the
protein,
which
in turn promotes
H2 O2
byisactivating
NADPH
oxidase gene activation
AtRbohF and
by Gα
inducing
NO
accumulation
via the tran2
O
2
and
NO)
scriptional
upregulation
of
the
nitrate
reductase
gene
NIA1.
The
increased
ROS
(H
production by activating the NADPH oxidase gene AtRbohF and by inducing NO accumulationrevia
sults
stomatal closure.
The second
pathway,
versa,gene
linksNIA1.
ethylene
reduced
the in
transcriptional
upregulation
of the
nitrate vice
reductase
Thewith
increased
ROSROS
(H2levels
O2 and
via
EIN2-dependent
synthesis
of flavonols,
that ethylene
serve as with
ROS reduced
scavengers.
NO)
results in stomatal
closure.
The secondsecondary
pathway, metabolites
vice versa, links
ROS
Conversely, high levels of ABA signaling lead to elevated ROS production and stomatal closure.
levels via EIN2-dependent synthesis of flavonols, secondary metabolites that serve as ROS scavengers.
Positive interactions such as activation, production, and stabilization are represented with lines that
Conversely, high levels of ABA signaling lead to elevated ROS production and stomatal closure.
end in an arrowhead →. Negative interactions such as inactivation and repression are represented
interactions
such as activation,
and
stabilization
arewas
represented
withBioRenlines that
byPositive
lines that
end in a hammerhead
⊣. Theproduction,
background
image
of stomata
created with
end
in
an
arrowhead
→
.
Negative
interactions
such
as
inactivation
and
repression
are
represented
by
der.
lines that end in a hammerhead a. The background image of stomata was created with BioRender.

The complexity in the regulation of stomatal closure via the reciprocal regulation of
4. Ethylene and BR
ABA and ethylene biosynthesis has also been described. Plants overexpressing ethyleneBRs,ERFs
which
were first
discovered in
an organic
extract
of rapeseed
(Brassica
napus),
inducible
(AtERF1
in Arabidopsis,
JERF1
in tobacco,
TSRF1
in rice, and
TaERF1
in
are
a
class
of
polyhydroxy
steroid
plant
hormones
[130].
BRs
are
synthesized
by
multiple
Triticum aestivum) show enhanced expression of ABA biosynthetic genes and greater enand complex
all and
of which
triterpenoid
pathways
from
campesterol
dogenous
ABAroutes,
content,
thus proceed
result inthrough
stomatal
closure and
improved
abiotic
stress
in
the
ER
[130,131].
BRs
can
be
produced
by
most
plant
organs
and
act
locally.
bind
tolerance [75,112–115]. Reciprocally, high ABA levels in Arabidopsis induce the BRs
expresto the plasma membrane-localized receptor, BR-INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1) in Arabidopsis,
sion of the TF gene ABI4, and ABI4 protein in turn negatively regulates ethylene producenabling BRI1 to interact with its coreceptor BRI1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 (BAK1). The
tion by repressing the transcription of ethylene biosynthesis genes ACS4 and ACS8 [116],
BRI1-BAK1 complex deactivates another kinase, BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE2
Figure 3. Consequently, high concentrations of ABA limit ethylene production in guard
(BIN2), via a phosphorylation cascade. BIN2 phosphorylates and inhibits multiple TFs,
cells and induce stomata closure [117]. The negative feedback loop coordinating the ethsuch as BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT1 and BRI1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR1. The inactivation of
ylene and ABA levels could partially explain the early and late response of stomata actions
in response to abiotic stresses [111], Figure 3.
The antagonistic roles of ethylene and ABA have also been discovered in flooding
stress responses. To date, the role of ethylene in flooding stress tolerance has been well-

BIN2 by BRs releases and potentiates these TFs to trigger the BR-mediated transcriptional
cascade [131].
Similar to ethylene, BR is a hormone that can improve stress tolerance at the expense of
altered growth and development. In contrast to the antagonistic role of ethylene and ABA
in abiotic stress response, the synergistic interactions between ethylene and BR have been
demonstrated in several aspects of plant stress responses in Arabidopsis and tomato [132].
For example, salt stress inhibits seed germination, whereas either exogenous ethylene
or BR treatment increases germination rate by ameliorating the inhibitory effect of salt
stress in Arabidopsis [133]. Further studies in Arabidopsis found that salt stress reduces
ethylene production by repressing ACO expression in seed germination, whereas BR
reverses the drop in ethylene biosynthesis under salt stress by recovering ACO transcript
levels [133]. The stimulating effect of BR on ethylene evolution was also observed in tomato
seedlings exposed to salt stress [118]. In this system, BR promotes ethylene biosynthesis
and signaling by enhancing ACS activity and stabilizing the EILs [134]. The synergistic
effect of BR and ethylene then leads to H2 O2 accumulation and improved tomato seedling
salt stress tolerance due to an increase in antioxidant enzyme activities [134]. Furthermore,
inhibition of ethylene synthesis in cucumber blocks BR-relieved oxidative damage and thus
reduces plant tolerance to salt, osmotic, and cold stress, suggesting that ethylene may also be

required for BR-mediated abiotic stress tolerance [135]. Likewise, in rice, upon submergence
in water, flooding stress induces the expression of an ERF gene SUBMERGENCE1A (SUB1A)
which in turn increases BR levels by upregulating the transcription of BR biosynthetic genes.
BR
and the accumulated
ethylenekeeping
then work
together
suppress
riceand
shoot
elongation,
to suppress
rice shoot elongation,
the plants
in ato
quiescent
state
enabling
keeping
the plants
a quiescent
state and enabling plant survival [136], Figure 4.
plant survival
[136],in
Figure
4.

Figure 4. A model of rice adaptation to partial and complete water submergence regulated by GA,
Figure
4. A model of rice adaptation to partial and complete water submergence regulated by GA,
ABA, BR, and ethylene. Upon full submergence of rice plants under water (left box), ethylene activates transcription of an ERF TF gene SUB1A, and the SUB1A protein then up-regulates anaerobic
survival genes via the transcriptional induction and protein stabilization of ERF66/67 upon hypoxia
stress. In addition, ethylene suppresses GA-mediated stem elongation by directly activating the
transcription of DELLA protein genes, SLR1 and SLRL1, as well as by inhibiting BR signaling. Upon
partial submergence under water (right box), ethylene acts via the EIL proteins to induce the transcript levels of ERF genes SK1 and SK2 bringing about the GA signaling-mediated stem elongation

ABA, BR, and ethylene. Upon full submergence of rice plants under water (left box), ethylene
activates transcription of an ERF TF gene SUB1A, and the SUB1A protein then up-regulates anaerobic
survival genes via the transcriptional induction and protein stabilization of ERF66/67 upon hypoxia
stress. In addition, ethylene suppresses GA-mediated stem elongation by directly activating the
transcription of DELLA protein genes, SLR1 and SLRL1, as well as by inhibiting BR signaling. Upon
partial submergence under water (right box), ethylene acts via the EIL proteins to induce the transcript
levels of ERF genes SK1 and SK2 bringing about the GA signaling-mediated stem elongation in rice.
In deepwater wild rice, EIL-mediated signaling triggered by the hormone ethylene directly enhances
GA production and induces shoot elongation by transcriptionally activating a GA biosynthesis gene
SD1 that encodes a GA20-oxidase. Furthermore, ethylene promotes shoot elongation by relieving
ABA-imposed shoot growth inhibition. Positive interactions such as activation, production, and
stabilization are represented with lines that end in an arrowhead →. Negative interactions such as
inactivation and repression are represented by lines that end in a hammerhead a. The background
image of a rice plant was created with BioRender.

Another interesting example that illustrates the synergistic regulatory effects of ethylene and BR is the process of stomatal closure. In Arabidopsis, BR induces stomatal closure
by triggering H2 O2 and NO production [110], Figure 3. BR-stimulated H2 O2 and NO accumulation is significantly decreased in the dominant ethylene-insensitive mutant etr1 but is
strengthened in the ethylene overproducing ACS5 mutant ethylene overproducer1-1 [110],
suggesting that BR-mediated stomatal closure is dependent on ethylene signaling.
Importantly, the synergistic effects of BR and ethylene have been observed not only
in abiotic stress tolerance-related processes, but also in normal plant development, such
as in root growth or fruit ripening [132]. However, most of the developmental and abiotic
stress-related inquiries that explored the BR and ethylene crosstalk in vegetable species lack
critical genetic evidence [134,135]. Looking ahead, the systematic analysis of mutants in key
hormonal genes in both model and crop species would be necessary to further elucidate
the underlying mechanisms of BR and ethylene crosstalk to shed light on the mechanisms
that balance plant growth and stress tolerance at the phenotypic and molecular level.
5. Ethylene and Auxin
Auxin, whose name originates from the Greek “auxein” meaning “to grow/increase”,
was first described to play roles in plant development and growth by a Dutch biologist
Frits Warmolt Went [137]. The best-studied type of auxin, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), is
synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan through a two-step pathway. Tryptophan is
converted to indole-3-pyruvic acid (IPyA) by the TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE
OF ARABIDOPSIS1 (TAA1)/TAA1-RELATED family, and IPyA is then metabolized to
IAA by flavin-containing monooxygenases, YUCCAs (YUCs) [138]. IAA is perceived in
the nucleus where it binds to the TRANSPORT INHIBITOR-RESISTANT1(TIR1)/AUXIN
SIGNALING F-BOX (AFB) family of auxin receptors. This hormone-binding enables
the TIR1/AFB receptors to interact with AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (Aux/IAA)
proteins, triggering Aux/IAA degradation and the release of AUXIN RESPONSE FACTORs
(ARFs) which can now initiate transcriptional cascades of auxin-response genes [139].
The crosstalk between ethylene and auxin has been well characterized in recent years
in many developmental processes, especially in root elongation, root hair formation, and
adventitious root growth [140–142]. In most abiotic stress conditions, including high
salinity and water deficit, the developmental plasticity of the plant root is regulated by
the auxin-ethylene interaction, and the stress-induced remodeling of root architecture
confers stress tolerance [143]. Excess aluminum (Al), one of the major toxic elements in
acidic soils, alters the accumulation, polar transport, and the asymmetric distribution of
auxin in Arabidopsis roots, leading to reduced root elongation and enhanced Al stress
tolerance [144–147], Figure 5. These shifts in auxin abundance and spatial distribution
in response to Al stress arise from changes in the TAA1- and YUC3/5/7/8/9-mediated
local auxin biosynthesis [146,147] and PIN-FORMED2 (PIN2)- and AUXIN RESISTANT1
(AUX1)-mediated polar auxin transport in roots [53]. These processes, in turn, depend on

proper ethylene biosynthesis and signaling [53,146,147]. Ethylene signaling is thought to
act upstream and synergistically with auxin to mediate Al-induced root growth inhibition
in Arabidopsis. Furthermore, EIN3 directly activates the expression of TAA1, YUC9, and
Plants 2022, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW
12 of 27
AUX1 to induce auxin accumulation in root transition zones, resulting in the inhibition of
root growth [21,53,146–148], Figure 5.

Figure5.5.AAmodel
modelofofroot
rootgrowth
growthregulation
regulationininArabidopsis
Arabidopsistriggered
triggeredby
byAl
Alstress
stressand
andmediated
mediatedby
by
Figure
the crosstalk between JA, CK, auxin, and ethylene. Under Al stress, enhanced ethylene production
the crosstalk between JA, CK, auxin, and ethylene. Under Al stress, enhanced ethylene production
upregulates the local transcript levels of auxin biosynthesis genes TAA1 and YUCs promoted by the
upregulates the local transcript levels of auxin biosynthesis genes TAA1 and YUCs promoted by the
transcriptional upregulation of EIN3 and EIL1. The increased protein abundance of TAA1 and YUCs
transcriptional
of EIN3 within
and EIL1.
increased
protein
abundance
of TAA1
and YUCs
results in localupregulation
auxin accumulation
the The
roots,
suppressing
primary
root growth.
Downstream
results
in
local
auxin
accumulation
within
the
roots,
suppressing
primary
root
growth.
Downstream
of auxin, local accumulation of CK triggered by ARF7-mediated induction of the CK biosynthesis
ofgenes
auxin,
local
accumulation
CK triggered
ARF7-mediated
induction
of inhibition
the CK biosynthesis
IPTs
activates
the CK of
response,
whichby
also
contributes to root
growth
in response
genes
the COI1-mediated
CK response, which
also contributes
to root
growth inhibition
to Al IPTs
stress.activates
In parallel,
JA signaling
downstream
of ethylene
is involvedininresponse
Al stressrootIngrowth
inhibition
through the
transcriptional
repression
of PLT genes
encoding
toinduced
Al stress.
parallel,
COI1-mediated
JA signaling
downstream
of ethylene
is involved
in AP2
Al
TFs. Positive interactions
as activation,
and stabilization
areofrepresented
with lines
stress-induced
root growthsuch
inhibition
throughproduction,
the transcriptional
repression
PLT genes encoding
thatTFs.
endPositive
in an arrowhead
→.such
Negative
interactions
such as and
inactivation
and are
repression
are repreAP2
interactions
as activation,
production,
stabilization
represented
with
sented by lines that end in a hammerhead ⊣. The background image of an Arabidopsis root was
lines that end in an arrowhead →. Negative interactions such as inactivation and repression are
created with BioRender.
represented by lines that end in a hammerhead a. The background image of an Arabidopsis root was
created with BioRender.

Besides Al, other toxic metals characteristic of acidic soils, such as dichromate, cadmium, or excess iron, and alkaline soils have also been described to enhance ethylene production in Arabidopsis roots [148–152]. Plant responses to these toxic metals lead to root
growth inhibition and involve enhanced ethylene production and signaling, which in turn
induce auxin accumulation and polar auxin transport by upregulating the expression of
AUX1 and/or PIN2 in Arabidopsis [148–153], Figure 5. The resulting root architecture
changes triggered by these abiotic stresses in the soil and mediated by the ethylene-auxin

Besides Al, other toxic metals characteristic of acidic soils, such as dichromate, cadmium, or excess iron, and alkaline soils have also been described to enhance ethylene
production in Arabidopsis roots [148–152]. Plant responses to these toxic metals lead to
root growth inhibition and involve enhanced ethylene production and signaling, which
in turn induce auxin accumulation and polar auxin transport by upregulating the expression of AUX1 and/or PIN2 in Arabidopsis [148–153], Figure 5. The resulting root
architecture changes triggered by these abiotic stresses in the soil and mediated by the
ethylene-auxin crosstalk are thought to increase plant tolerance to these unfavorable conditions [143,152,153].
The auxin- and ethylene-mediated root architecture remodeling also drives plant tolerance in response to nutrient deficiencies [154]. To mitigate the magnesium deficiency stress,
plants enhance root hair initiation and growth through the mutual activation of ethylene
and auxin signaling [155]. Magnesium deficiency in Arabidopsis induces ethylene production that promotes auxin accumulation by activating AUX1, PIN1, and PIN2 transcription
in roots. The extra auxin stimulates further ethylene production by inducing the expression
of ACO and ACS enzyme genes [155]. Knockout mutant analyses show that the roles of
ethylene in regulating magnesium deficiency-induced root hair development require auxin
signaling [155], suggesting that auxin acts primarily downstream of ethylene to regulate
root hair morphogenesis. Similarly, ethylene signaling and ethylene-triggered downstream
auxin and ROS signaling act together in the inhibition of root hair growth caused by boron
deficiency, as evidenced by genetic and chemical treatment analyses [156,157]. Moreover,
auxin, ethylene, and ROS also cooperate in regulating root architecture in response to
mechanical impedance stress [158].
Another classical example of the ethylene and auxin crosstalk mediating abiotic stress
tolerance and leading to major plant architecture and growth pattern changes is the response
to flooding stress [159]. Ethylene and auxin interactions play important roles in adventitious
root formation, which helps to relieve the flooding stress plants face [159]. In waterlogged
Rumex palustris, the adventitious root formation is mediated by ethylene accumulation that
enhances the sensitivity of root-forming tissues to auxin [160]. In tomato, waterlogginginduced adventitious root formation requires ethylene perception, as revealed by the
study of an ethylene receptor mutant, Never ripe [161]. Flooding stress promotes ethylene
production and, hence, ethylene signaling that, in turn, stimulates auxin transport to
submerged stems to induce adventitious root growth [161]. In cucumber, ethylene signal
transduction and ethylene-triggered auxin signaling act through the ROS pathway to
induce adventitious root growth in response to flooding stress [162]. Together, these
studies suggest that auxin signaling works downstream of ethylene to promote flooding
stress-induced adventitious root formation in several species.
Besides making adventitious roots, submerged crop species, such as rice and R. palustris, often develop aerenchymatous tissue in both roots and shoots to facilitate gas diffusion
to the roots to help cope with flooding-induced anoxia [163]. The rice mutant iaa13 with
suppressed auxin signaling shows reduced ethylene-induced aerenchyma formation under
O2 -deprived conditions, along with the decreased expression of ethylene biosynthesis
genes [164], supporting the notion that intricate ethylene-auxin interactions are involved in
regulating aerenchyma formation in response to flooding/waterlogging stress.
The ethylene and auxin crosstalk is not limited to roots, but also plays a role in
hypocotyl responses to heat stress. In Arabidopsis grown at normal temperatures in the
light, ethylene-activated EIN3 promotes hypocotyl elongation, in part by stimulating PIF3
expression [165]. Under elevated temperatures, EIN3 attenuates auxin-stimulated thermomorphogenic hypocotyl elongation through the inhibition of the apoplastic acidification
progression by transcriptionally repressing the APD7 protein phosphatase gene [166], suggesting antagonistic roles of auxin and ethylene in regulating hypocotyl response to heat
stress. In contrast, auxin and ethylene show synergistic effects upon heat stress in roots. Elevated temperatures enhance TAA1-dependent auxin biosynthesis through ETR1-mediated

ethylene signaling, and the accumulated auxin and subsequent auxin transport are critical
for maintaining normal root growth and gravity sensing under heat stress [167].
Taken together, the studies described above highlight the importance of altered root
architecture controlled by ethylene-auxin interactions for conferring tolerance to water
deficiency, heavy metals, high salinity, nutrient deprivation, and flooding. To further
elucidate the mechanisms behind different plant strategies for root architecture remodeling
in response to abiotic stress, mathematical models incorporating primary root initiation
and lateral root growth governed by the auxin and ethylene crosstalk are required. By
quantitatively evaluating the effects of the biosynthetic and signaling components of the
individual auxin and ethylene pathways and the genes involved in the crosstalk between
these two signals in response to different abiotic stresses, we can gain insights as to how to
design and genetically modify plants with enhanced tolerance to these abiotic stress factors
while minimizing the tradeoff in plant growth and development.
6. Ethylene and GA
GA, whose name originates from the fungus Gibberella fujikuroi that induces rapid
growth in rice shoots, was first discovered in plants as a growth-regulating hormone [168].
GAs are derived from trans-geranylgeranyl diphosphate, which is first converted to entkaurene and then to GA12, a nonbioactive GA. GA12 is then transformed into bioactive GAs, such as GA1, GA3, GA4, and GA7 by the GA20- and GA3-OXIDASE family enzymes [169]. The bioactive GAs in the nucleus bind to the soluble GA receptor
GIBBERELLIN-INSENSITIVE DWARF1 (GID1) that interacts with DELLA proteins. When
GA-GID1-DELLA complex forms, DELLAs undergo structural changes that enable their
recognition by GID2/SLEEPY1 F-box proteins and targeting for proteasomal degradation.
With DELLAs degraded, the TFs deactivated by DELLA are released and can initiate the
GA-mediated transcriptional cascade [170].
The role of ethylene in plant responses to flooding has been studied in several species.
Two distinct ethylene-and-GA crosstalk mechanisms in plants coping with different types
of flooding stress have been elucidated to date. In rice, flooding rapidly promotes ethylene
accumulation [159]. Upon partial submergence in water, ethylene activates the transcription of class VII ERFs SNORKEL1 (SK1) and SK2, and in turn, SK1 and SK2 induce GA
signaling-mediated stem elongation in rice [170,171], Figure 4. Some deep-water wild rice
varieties elongate their stems through the OsEIL1-mediated induction of a GA biosynthetic
gene SEMIDWARF1 (SD1), the gene whose loss-of-function allele in domesticated rice
has been at the heart of the Green Revolution [172]. The stem elongation enables rice to
escape out from the water and perform photosynthesis to alleviate the flooding stress.
With full submergence under water, flooding stress becomes more detrimental for plants,
primarily because of limited gas exchange under water, which leads to an energy and
carbohydrate deficit. In coping with full submergence under water, rice deprioritizes
growth to reach increased hypoxia tolerance. In this way, another rice ERF, SUB1A, with
high protein similarity to SKs, is transcriptionally induced by full submergence flooding
stress through ethylene signaling, not only dampening ethylene biosynthesis [173,174], but
also suppressing GA-mediated stem elongation by directly activating the transcription of
DELLA protein genes SLENDER RICE1 (SLR1) and SLENDER RICE-LIKE1 (SLRL1) [175],
Figure 4. Furthermore, SUB1A-1 directly activates the transcription of ERF66 and ERF67,
whose overexpression activates the expression of anaerobic survival genes and whose protein stability is enhanced under hypoxia stress upon full plant submergence in water [176].
In line with these molecular studies, rice varieties possessing the SUB1A-1 gene are tolerant
to prolonged full flooding [173,174,177]. These two opposite plant responses to partial
submergence and full submergences, which rely on different ethylene-induced ERFs and
their crosstalk with GA (Figure 4), are exciting examples of how plants can differentially
adapt to variable environments to maximize plant survival.
Two contrasting regulatory effects of the ethylene-GA crosstalk on plant growth have
also been described in response to osmotic stress. Upon exposure to mannitol, Arabidopsis

plants synthesize and accumulate ethylene in actively dividing leaf cells, ultimately leading
to the induction of ethylene signaling genes ETR2, ERS1, CTR1, EIN3, EIL1, EBF1, and EBF2
and several ERF genes including ERF6 and ERF11 [31]. Studies show that overexpression
of ERF6, a direct transcriptional target of EIN3 in Arabidopsis [128], not only results in
the increased expression of GA2-OXIDASE6 that degrades GA, but also in the enhanced
accumulation of DELLAs due to the stabilization of these regulatory proteins, which in turn
inhibit the shoot and leaf growth [177]. Conversely, another mannitol-induced ERF, ERF11,
promotes internode elongation and leaf growth by directly increasing GA biosynthesis
and, therefore, DELLA degradation and indirectly inhibiting ethylene biosynthesis via
transcriptional repression of ACS genes [178,179]. Interestingly, both ERF6-overexpression
lines and erf11 loss-of-function mutants are more tolerant to mannitol [178,179]. Taken
together, these studies demonstrate that ERF6 and ERF11 in Arabidopsis seedlings have
opposing roles in regulating the tradeoff between growth and osmotic stress tolerance.
Follow-up work has shown that ERF6 acts as an upstream regulator of ERF11 through
direct transcriptional activation [178,180], suggesting that the effect of ethylene and GA
interaction may quickly shift in response to abiotic stress.
To sum up, the interaction between GA and ethylene in abiotic stress tolerance is
primarily elucidated at the transcriptional level, with the two hormones affecting the same
set of TFs. As in the case of JA-ethylene synergy in etiolated Arabidopsis seedlings, GA
was also discovered to enhance apical hook curvature, at least in part via a release of
EIN3 from the DELLA-EIN3 repressive complex [21,181]. Given that the JA signaling
components JAZs and MYCs form repressive complexes with EIN3/EIL1 [78], constructing
a transcriptional regulatory network incorporating JA, GA, and ethylene TFs under different
types of abiotic stresses would be important to understand how plants cope with adverse
environmental conditions by fine-tuning the transcriptional cascade through leveraging
the hormone crosstalk.
7. Ethylene and SA
SA, whose name comes from the Latin word salix (willow), is a phenolic compound
produced by plants in response to pathogen exposure and was first identified as a plant
immunity-related hormone [182]. SA is synthesized from chorismite through two independent pathways, the isochorismate, and the phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) pathways.
SA binds to NON-EXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED1 (NPR1) oligomers and
causes the complex to dissociate into monomers that migrate to the nucleus. In the nucleus,
NPR1 interacts with the TGACG-BINDING FACTOR family of TFs to induce the expression
of PATHOGENESIS-RELATED genes [183].
The rapidly induced ethylene production triggered by environmental stress is thought
to modulate oxidative stress, which in turn affects plant growth [184]. SA has been reported
to inhibit the ethylene production induced by several types of abiotic stresses [185,186].
For example, exogenous SA alleviates heat stress by increasing proline-metabolism and
restricting ethylene biosynthesis in heat-stressed plants by inhibiting the ACS activity in
wheat [187]. Similarly, the SA-mediated ACS activity inhibition enhances plant tolerance to
salt and drought stress in mustard, mung bean, and sweet pepper [188–190]. Additionally,
exogenous SA has been described to block the conversion of ACC to ethylene, possibly
by inhibiting the ACO activity as demonstrated in pear suspension cells [191]. On the
contrary, ethylene and SA act in concert to regulate cell death in Arabidopsis and tobacco
leaves under ozone (O3 ) stress [192,193]. O3 -induced ethylene promotes SA biosynthesis
by up-regulating the expression of the SA biosynthetic genes encoding CHORISMATE
MUTASE and PAL [193]. Inhibition of either ethylene biosynthesis or SA biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis rescues the O3 -induced hypersensitive response cell death phenotype, whereas
overproduction of ethylene aggravates cell death [192]. On the other hand, in Arabidopsis,
chemical or genetic perturbation of SA signaling blocks ethylene production in response to
O3 , suggesting that SA is required for O3 -induced ethylene biosynthesis [192].

In summary, many characterized SA-ethylene interactions in abiotic stress responses
involve the mutual regulation of these hormones’ biosynthetic pathways. The synergistic
effects of ethylene and SA in abiotic stress tolerance propose that SA and ethylene may
leverage some common machinery to regulate downstream genes, making this an intriguing
possibility to investigate in future studies. Furthermore, given the synergistic nature of the
JA-ethylene crosstalk at the transcriptional level and the antagonistic crosstalk between
the SA and JA signaling pathways [194], elucidation of the genetic interplay between SA,
ethylene, and JA would be another interesting opportunity to explore in the future.
8. Ethylene and CK
CKs, whose effects were first uncovered by studying plant shoot induction in tissue
culture in response to coconut milk, are involved in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation [195]. CKs are adenine-derived hormones that are synthesized via multiple-step
reactions involving ISOPENTENYL TRANSFERASE (IPT), CYTOCHROME P450 FAMILY
735A, and LONELY GUY enzymes [196]. In cells, CKs bind to the receptors ARABIDOPSIS
HISTIDINE KINASEs (AHKs) and induce their autophosphorylation. AHKs also phosphorylate ARABIDOPSIS HISTIDINE PHOSPHOTRANSMITTER (AHP) proteins that
in turn activate type-B ARABIDOPSIS RESPONSE REGULATOR (ARR) TFs to initiate
CK-mediated transcription [195].
Just like in the case of stress-triggered ethylene production, abiotic factors can rapidly
modulate CK levels in plants by altering the expression of CK biosynthetic genes [197]. In
Arabidopsis, a high level of CK has been described to stabilize ACS5 and ACS9 [198–200],
thus leading to ethylene accumulation. Reciprocally, Al stress-induced ethylene is known to
enhance local CK biosynthesis by activating the expression of CK biosynthetic genes encoding IPTs, leading to root growth inhibition under Al stress [148,201], Figure 5. Not only do
ethylene and CK mutually regulate each other’s biosynthetic pathways, but also ethylene
interferes with the CK signaling output at the level of transcriptional regulation [51]. Specifically, Arabidopsis EIN3 directly suppresses the expression of the CK signaling repressor
genes, type-A ARRs ARR5, ARR7, and ARR15, by directly binding to their promoters [51].
Overexpression of these three ARRs confers enhanced freezing tolerance [51], suggesting
that these genes serve as mediators of the crosstalk between ethylene and CK in the cold
stress response [51].
Thus, the bulk of current studies focusing on CK and ethylene interactions in abiotic
stress are consistent with the model where CK induces ethylene biosynthesis and, vice
versa, ethylene induces CK biosynthesis and signaling. However, these two hormones
also intersect in normal plant development. For example, in root growth regulation, the
ethylene receptor ETR1 upon binding ethylene was shown to directly activate a multistep
phosphorelay CK signal transduction cascade (AHK-AHP-ARRs), integrating ethylene and
CK in the control of root apical meristem size [202,203]. It will be interesting to test if the
ETR1-mediated CK signaling also plays a role in abiotic stress responses.
9. Concluding Remarks and Future Perspectives
In this review, we summarized several lines of evidence supporting the notion that
the growth-stress tolerance trade-off is in part regulated by the active crosstalk between
ethylene and other plant hormones. The pertinent knowledge acquired in the past few
decades about ethylene signaling and its interactions with other hormones will guide
scientists in their efforts to engineer better-performing crops in which stress responses are
uncoupled from the growth penalty, and high yields are maintained under suboptimal
environmental conditions. As described above, some hormone interactions enable plants
to enhance the growth of certain plant organs or tissues in response to specific stresses, and
such selective growth helps the overall plant survival and ultimate productivity by reducing
the adverse effects of stress. The rational strategy would then be to equip crops with such
specialized tissue-specific responses that permit plant adaptation to the corresponding
types of stress. For example, by modulating the auxin-ethylene crosstalk in rice roots,

aerenchymatous tissue formation could be induced to improve crop growth and yield under
oxygen-deficient conditions [164,204–206]. Similarly, crops with enhanced adventitious
roots, lateral roots, and root hairs can be obtained by engineering JA, auxin, or ethylene
crosstalk, and these root-boosted plants would have better growth and yield in nutrientpoor soils and under water-scarce conditions, as has been demonstrated in multiple studies,
including those performed on tomato [161] and maize [207–209]. Alternatively, under
some abiotic stress conditions, rational manipulation of hormone crosstalk can deprioritize
the plant growth but trigger specialized metabolism and antioxidant systems to enhance
plant stress tolerance and survival. Yet, in other scenarios, the hormone crosstalk can
maximize organ growth to enable the plant to escape from unfavorable conditions. The
seemingly contradictory approach is well-illustrated by the aforementioned ethylene-GA
crosstalk-mediated flooding stress response in rice, with opposite strategies adopted in
full versus partial submergence conditions (Figure 4). In fact, both strategies have been
implemented in transgenic plants to enhance flooding stress tolerance [170,174,210].
Given the great potential of hormone engineering in improving plant growth and
crop yield under unfavorable environmental conditions, future efforts should also be
directed at bettering our understanding of hormone interactions at the basic mechanistic
level. At present, many gaps remain in our comprehension of how the hormone crosstalk
is modified by the environment and serves to balance plant growth with abiotic stress
responses. For example, while we know that the endogenous levels of ethylene and other
hormones in plants are rapidly altered in response to abiotic stresses, the mechanisms
that detect and then translate the environmental signals into changes in the biosynthesis
or catabolism of these growth regulators are only starting to get unraveled. Hypoxia or
flooding stress, for example, could, in theory, be directly sensed by the loss of oxidation
of the N termini of proteins, as may be the case for the ACO1 enzyme involved ethylene
production and a subgroup of ERFs involved in ethylene responses, which ultimately
modulate the plant tolerance to these types of stresses [211–215]. Likewise, heat stress may
be sensed by the red/far-red light receptor PHYTOCHROME B [216,217], osmotic/drought
stress is perceived by the calcium channel REDUCED HYPEROSMOLARITY-INDUCED
[Ca2+ ] INCREASE1 (OSCA1) and its paralogs [218], cold stress is detected by the OPEN
STOMATA1 pathway [219], and salt stress is discerned via binding of monovalent cations
to the glucuronic acid of the glycosyl inositol phosphoryl ceramide sphingolipids [219].
However, besides the aforementioned flooding stress-induced hypoxia, it remains elusive
how this initial perception is mechanistically linked to the changes in hormone biosynthesis
and/or signaling and how the coordination between the respective hormonal pathways is
achieved. Furthermore, plants in the real world are often exposed to various combinations
of abiotic stresses, and it remains to be deciphered how ethylene and other hormones are
leveraged by plants to integrate the inputs from multiple stress signals and at what level
the signaling cascades intersect and feedback onto one another. With the development of
sensitive analytical and genetic methods of hormone quantification and monitoring, as
well as various high-throughput omics approaches and mathematical models, complex
relationships can now be explored at multiple levels, from protein-protein or protein-DNA
interactions to intricate transcriptional regulatory networks. These research directions are
expected to provide new insights into the mechanisms of adaptive responses co-regulated
by multiple hormones at once.
Another interesting and important aspect of the signal crosstalk that needs to be
explored at a much greater depth is the spatiotemporal regulation of hormone interactions.
The response of plants to any stress is dynamic and often tissue-specific [220]. Therefore,
monitoring the temporal evolution of hormone crosstalk in specific tissues or developmental stages under specific conditions (e.g., in the dynamic regulation of stomatal opening
and closure in leaves under drought stress, or time-series documenting the process of
lateral root initiation and outgrowth in response to nutrient deprivation) is an important
endeavor critical for the future of plant trait improvement efforts. Perhaps, a combination
of single-cell omics approaches with the development of new, more sensitive versions of

hormone reporters and biosensors, calcium, and ROS sensors, etc. and stacking of these
detection devices in model plants to monitor the activity of multiple hormones and second
messengers at once will be instrumental for reconstructing the sequence of events from
the moment the stress is perceived to the phenotypic outcomes. Translating the gained
knowledge to non-model crop plants would greatly impact agriculture.
In conclusion, the network of hormone interactions orchestrates both normal plant
development and responses to biotic and abiotic stress. How a handful of growth regulators
are leveraged by plants to interpret a combination of internal and environmental inputs and
tip the balance between resource allocation towards growth versus defense and survival
is a fascinating long-term question that will be key to our ability to maintain and further
improve agricultural production under deteriorating climates.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.C., A.N.S. and J.M.A.; writing—original draft preparation, H.C. and A.N.S.; writing—review and editing, H.C., A.N.S., J.M.A. and D.A.B.J.; preparation of
Figures and Table, H.C., A.N.S. and J.M.A.; funding assistance, A.N.S. and J.M.A. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The research in the Alonso-Stepanova lab is supported by the National Science Foundation
grants 1650139, 1444561, and 1940829 to A.N.S. and J.M.A., and 1750006 to A.N.S.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We are thankful to Chengsong Zhao, Mario Fenech, and Anna Yaschenko for
the critical reading of this manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

Zhang, H.; Zhu, J.; Gong, Z.; Zhu, J. Abiotic stress responses in plants. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2021, 21, 1–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chapin, F.S. Integrated Responses of Plants to Stress. BioScience 1991, 41, 29–36. [CrossRef]
Heil, M.; Walters, D.; Newton, A.; Lyon, G. Trade-offs associated with induced resistance. In Induced Resistance for Plant Defense;
John Wiley & Sons: Chichester, UK, 2014; pp. 171–192.
Neljubow, D. Uber die horizontale Nutation der Stengel von Pisum Sativum und einiger anderen Planzen. Bot. Centralbl. Beih.
1901, 10, 128–139.
Merchante, C.; Stepanova, A.N. The Triple Response Assay and Its Use to Characterize Ethylene Mutants in Arabidopsis. Ethyl.
Signal. 2017, 1573, 163–209. [CrossRef]
Bleecker, A.B.; Kende, H. Ethylene: A Gaseous Signal Molecule in Plants. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2000, 16, 1–18. [CrossRef]
Binder, B.M. Ethylene signaling in plants. J. Biol. Chem. 2020, 295, 7710–7725. [CrossRef]
Adams, D.O.; Yang, S.F. Ethylene biosynthesis: Identification of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid as an intermediate in the
conversion of methionine to ethylene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1979, 76, 170–174. [CrossRef]
Boller, T.; Herner, R.C.; Kende, H. Assay for and enzymatic formation of an ethylene precursor, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic
acid. Planta 1979, 145, 293–303. [CrossRef]
Hamilton, A.J.; Bouzayen, M.; Grierson, D. Identification of a tomato gene for the ethylene-forming enzyme by expression in
yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1991, 88, 7434–7437. [CrossRef]
Ververidis, P.; John, P. Complete recovery in vitro of ethylene-forming enzyme activity. Phytochemistry 1991, 30, 725–727.
[CrossRef]
Kende, H. Ethylene biosynthesis. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 1993, 44, 283–307. [CrossRef]
Xu, J.; Zhang, S. Ethylene Biosynthesis and Regulation in Plants. In Ethylene in Plants; Wen, C.-K., Ed.; Springer: Dordrecht, The
Netherlands, 2015; pp. 1–25. ISBN 978-94-017-9483-1.
Alonso, J.M.; Stepanova, A.N. The Ethylene Signaling Pathway. Science 2004, 306, 1513–1515. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Lacey, R.F.; Binder, B.M. How plants sense ethylene gas—The ethylene receptors. J. Inorg. Biochem. 2014, 133, 58–62. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Shakeel, S.N.; Gao, Z.; Amir, M.; Chen, Y.-F.; Rai, M.I.; Haq, N.U.; Schaller, G.E. Ethylene Regulates Levels of Ethylene
Receptor/CTR1 Signaling Complexes in Arabidopsis thaliana. J. Biol. Chem. 2015, 290, 12415–12424. [CrossRef]
Li, W.; Ma, M.; Feng, Y.; Li, H.; Wang, Y.; Ma, Y.; Li, M.; An, F.; Guo, H. EIN2-Directed Translational Regulation of Ethylene
Signaling in Arabidopsis. Cell 2015, 163, 670–683. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Merchante, C.; Brumos, J.; Yun, J.; Hu, Q.; Spencer, K.R.; Enríquez, P.; Binder, B.M.; Heber, S.; Stepanova, A.N.; Alonso, J.M.
Gene-Specific Translation Regulation Mediated by the Hormone-Signaling Molecule EIN2. Cell 2015, 163, 684–697. [CrossRef]

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.
46.

Guo, H.; Ecker, J.R. Plant responses to ethylene gas are mediated by SCFEBF1/EBF2-dependent proteolysis of EIN3 transcription
factor. Cell 2003, 115, 667–677. [CrossRef]
Potuschak, T.; Lechner, E.; Parmentier, Y.; Yanagisawa, S.; Grava, S.; Koncz, C.; Genschik, P. EIN3-Dependent Regulation of Plant
Ethylene Hormone Signaling by Two Arabidopsis F Box Proteins: EBF1 and EBF2. Cell 2003, 115, 679–689. [CrossRef]
Dolgikh, V.A.; Pukhovaya, E.M.; Zemlyanskaya, E.V. Shaping ethylene response: The role of EIN3/EIL1 transcription factors.
Front. Plant Sci. 2019, 10, 1030. [CrossRef]
Debbarma, J.; Sarki, Y.N.; Saikia, B.; Boruah, H.P.D.; Singha, D.L.; Chikkaputtaiah, C. Ethylene Response Factor (ERF) Family
Proteins in Abiotic Stresses and CRISPR-Cas9 Genome Editing of ERFs for Multiple Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Crop Plants:
A Review. Mol. Biotechnol. 2019, 61, 153–172. [CrossRef]
Dietz, K.; Vogel, M.O.; Viehhauser, A. AP2/EREBP transcription factors are part of gene regulatory networks and integrate
metabolic, hormonal and environmental signals in stress acclimation and retrograde signalling. Protoplasma 2010, 245, 3–14.
[CrossRef]
Mizoi, J.; Shinozaki, K.; Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K. AP2/ERF family transcription factors in plant abiotic stress responses. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta Gene Regul. Mech. 2012, 1819, 86–96. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chandler, J.W. Class VIIIb APETALA2 Ethylene Response Factors in Plant Development. Trends Plant. Sci. 2018, 23, 151–162.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nakano, T.; Suzuki, K.; Fujimura, T.; Shinshi, H. Genome-Wide Analysis of the ERF Gene Family in Arabidopsis and Rice. Plant.
Physiol. 2006, 140, 411–432. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kagale, S.; Rozwadowski, K. EAR motif-mediated transcriptional repression in plants: An underlying mechanism for epigenetic
regulation of gene expression. Epigenetics 2011, 6, 141–146. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Tiwari, S.B.; Belachew, A.; Ma, S.F.; Young, M.; Ade, J.; Shen, Y.; Marion, C.M.; Holtan, H.E.; Bailey, A.; Stone, J.K. The EDLL
motif: A potent plant transcriptional activation domain from AP2/ERF transcription factors. Plant J. 2012, 70, 855–865. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Harkey, A.; Yoon, G.M.; Seo, D.H.; Delong, A.; Muday, G.K. Light Modulates Ethylene Synthesis, Signaling, and Downstream
Transcriptional Networks to Control Plant Development. Front. Plant. Sci. 2019, 10, 1094. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Pierik, R.; Sasidharan, R.; Voesenek, L.A.C.J. Growth Control by Ethylene: Adjusting Phenotypes to the Environment. J. Plant.
Growth Regul. 2007, 26, 188–200. [CrossRef]
Kazan, K. Diverse roles of jasmonates and ethylene in abiotic stress tolerance. Trends Plant. Sci. 2015, 20, 219–229. [CrossRef]
Kurepin, L.V.; Yeung, E.C.; Reid, D.M.; Pharis, R.P. Light Signaling Regulates Tulip Organ Growth and Ethylene Production in a
Tissue-Specific Manner. Int. J. Plant. Sci. 2016, 177, 339–346. [CrossRef]
Maksymiec, W. Signaling responses in plants to heavy metal stress. Acta Physiol. Plant. 2007, 29, 177–187. [CrossRef]
Argueso, C.T.; Hansen, M.; Kieber, J.J. Regulation of Ethylene Biosynthesis. J. Plant. Growth Regul. 2007, 26, 92–105. [CrossRef]
Zhao, M.; Liu, W.; Xia, X.; Wang, T.; Zhang, W. Cold acclimation-induced freezing tolerance of Medicago truncatula seedlings is
negatively regulated by ethylene. Physiol. Plant. 2014, 152, 115–129. [CrossRef]
Zhang, M.; Smith, J.A.C.; Harberd, N.P.; Jiang, C. The regulatory roles of ethylene and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in plant salt
stress responses. Plant Mol. Biol. 2016, 91, 651–659. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Dubois, M.; Claeys, H.; Broeck, L.V.D.; Inzé, D. Time of day determines Arabidopsis transcriptome and growth dynamics under
mild drought. Plant Cell Environ. 2017, 40, 180–189. [CrossRef]
Baerenfaller, K.; Massonnet, C.; Walsh, S.; Baginsky, S.; Bühlmann, P.; Hennig, L.; Hirsch-Hoffmann, M.; Howell, K.; Kahlau, S.;
Radziejwoski, A.; et al. Systems-based analysis of Arabidopsis leaf growth reveals adaptation to water deficit. Mol. Syst. Biol.
2012, 8, 606. [CrossRef]
Clauw, P.; Coppens, F.; De Beuf, K.; Dhondt, S.; Van Daele, T.; Maleux, K.; Storme, V.; Clement, L.; Gonzalez, N.; Inzé, D. Leaf
Responses to Mild Drought Stress in Natural Variants of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 2015, 167, 800–816. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Peng, H.-P.; Lin, T.-Y.; Wang, N.N.; Shih, M.-C. Differential expression of genes encoding 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate
synthase in Arabidopsis during hypoxia. Plant Mol. Biol. 2005, 58, 15–25. [CrossRef]
Eun, H.-D.; Ali, S.; Jung, H.; Kim, K.; Kim, W.-C. Profiling of ACC synthase gene (ACS11) expression in Arabidopsis induced by
abiotic stresses. Appl. Biol. Chem. 2019, 62, 42. [CrossRef]
Wang, X.; Ma, Q.; Wang, R.; Wang, P.; Liu, Y.; Mao, T. Submergence stress-induced hypocotyl elongation through ethylene
signaling-mediated regulation of cortical microtubules in Arabidopsis. J. Exp. Bot. 2019, 71, 1067–1077. [CrossRef]
Dong, H.; Zhen, Z.; Peng, J.; Chang, L.; Gong, Q.; Wang, N.N. Loss of ACS7 confers abiotic stress tolerance by modulating ABA
sensitivity and accumulation in Arabidopsis. J. Exp. Bot. 2011, 62, 4875–4887. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Skirycz, A.; Claeys, H.; De Bodt, S.; Oikawa, A.; Shinoda, S.; Andriankaja, M.; Maleux, K.; Eloy, N.; Coppens, F.; Yoo, S.-D.; et al.
Pause-and-Stop: The Effects of Osmotic Stress on Cell Proliferation during Early Leaf Development in Arabidopsis and a Role for
Ethylene Signaling in Cell Cycle Arrest. Plant Cell 2011, 23, 1876–1888. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zhao, X.-C.; Schaller, G. Effect of salt and osmotic stress upon expression of the ethylene receptor ETR1 inArabidopsis thaliana.
FEBS Lett. 2004, 562, 189–192. [CrossRef]
Wang, Y.; Liu, C.; Li, K.; Sun, F.; Hu, H.; Li, X.; Zhao, Y.; Han, C.; Zhang, W.; Duan, Y.; et al. Arabidopsis EIN2 modulates stress
response through abscisic acid response pathway. Plant Mol. Biol. 2007, 64, 633–644. [CrossRef]

47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.

61.
62.
63.

64.

65.
66.
67.
68.
69.

70.
71.
72.
73.

Ahmadizadeh, M.; Chen, J.-T.; Hasanzadeh, S.; Ahmar, S.; Heidari, P. Insights into the genes involved in the ethylene biosynthesis
pathway in Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa. J. Genet. Eng. Biotechnol. 2020, 18, 62. [CrossRef]
Yan, Z.; Wang, J.; Wang, F.; Xie, C.; Lv, B.; Yu, Z.; Dai, S.; Liu, X.; Xia, G.; Tian, H. MPK3/6-induced degradation of ARR1/10/12
promotes salt tolerance in Arabidopsis. EMBO Rep. 2021, 22, e52457. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Peng, J.; Li, Z.; Wen, X.; Li, W.; Shi, H.; Yang, L.; Zhu, H.; Guo, H. Salt-induced stabilization of EIN3/EIL1 confers salinity
tolerance by deterring ROS accumulation in Arabidopsis. PloS Genet. 2014, 10, e1004664. [CrossRef]
Sun, L.; Jing, Y.; Liu, X.; Li, Q.; Xue, Z.; Cheng, Z.; Wang, D.; He, H.; Qian, W. Heat stress-induced transposon activation correlates
with 3D chromatin organization rearrangement in Arabidopsis. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 1886. [CrossRef]
Shi, Y.; Tian, S.; Hou, L.; Huang, X.; Zhang, X.; Guo, H.; Yang, S. Ethylene Signaling Negatively Regulates Freezing Tolerance by
Repressing Expression of CBF and Type-A ARR Genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2012, 24, 2578–2595. [CrossRef]
Schellingen, K.; Van Der Straeten, D.; Vandenbussche, F.; Prinsen, E.; Remans, T.; Vangronsveld, J.; Cuypers, A. Cadmium-induced
ethylene production and responses in Arabidopsis thaliana rely on ACS2 and ACS6 gene expression. BMC Plant Biol. 2014,
14, 214. [CrossRef]
Sun, P.; Tian, Q.-Y.; Chen, J.; Zhang, W.-H. Aluminium-induced inhibition of root elongation in Arabidopsis is mediated by
ethylene and auxin. J. Exp. Bot. 2009, 61, 347–356. [CrossRef]
Liang, X.; Shen, N.F.; Theologis, A. Li+-regulated 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase gene expression in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plant J. 1996, 10, 1027–1036. [CrossRef]
Cao, S.; Chen, Z.; Liu, G.; Jiang, L.; Yuan, H.; Ren, G.; Bian, X.; Jian, H.; Ma, X. The Arabidopsis Ethylene-Insensitive 2 gene is
required for lead resistance. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2009, 47, 308–312. [CrossRef]
Husain, T.; Fatima, A.; Suhel, M.; Singh, S.; Sharma, A.; Prasad, S.M.; Singh, V.P. A brief appraisal of ethylene signaling under
abiotic stress in plants. Plant Signal. Behav. 2020, 15, 1782051. [CrossRef]
Druege, U. Ethylene and Plant Responses to Abiotic Stress. In Ethylene Action in Plants; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
2006; pp. 81–118.
Steffens, B. The role of ethylene and ROS in salinity, heavy metal, and flooding responses in rice. Front. Plant Sci. 2014, 5, 685.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nazar, R.; Khan, I.R.; Iqbal, N.; Masood, A.; Khan, N.A. Involvement of ethylene in reversal of salt-inhibited photosynthesis by
sulfur in mustard. Physiol. Plant. 2014, 152, 331–344. [CrossRef]
Sharma, A.; Kumar, V.; Sidhu, G.P.S.; Kumar, R.; Kohli, S.K.; Yadav, P.; Kapoor, D.; Bali, A.S.; Shahzad, B.; Khanna, K. Abiotic
stress management in plants: Role of ethylene. In Molecular Plant Abiotic Stress: Biology and Biotechnology; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ,
USA, 2019; pp. 185–208.
Ku, Y.-S.; Sintaha, M.; Cheung, M.-Y.; Lam, H.-M. Plant Hormone Signaling Crosstalks between Biotic and Abiotic Stress
Responses. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 3206. [CrossRef]
Devireddy, A.R.; Zandalinas, S.I.; Fichman, Y.; Mittler, R. Integration of reactive oxygen species and hormone signaling during
abiotic stress. Plant J. 2020, 105, 459–476. [CrossRef]
Knight, H.; Zarka, D.G.; Okamoto, H.; Thomashow, M.F.; Knight, M.R. Abscisic Acid Induces CBF Gene Transcription and
Subsequent Induction of Cold-Regulated Genes via the CRT Promoter Element. Plant Physiol. 2004, 135, 1710–1717. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Yang, J.; Duan, G.; Li, C.; Liu, L.; Han, G.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, C. The Crosstalks Between Jasmonic Acid and Other Plant Hormone
Signaling Highlight the Involvement of Jasmonic Acid as a Core Component in Plant Response to Biotic and Abiotic Stresses.
Front. Plant Sci. 2019, 10, 1349. [CrossRef]
Demole, E.; Lederer, E.; Mercier, D. Isolement et détermination de la structure du jasmonate de méthyle, constituant odorant
caracteristique de l’essence de jasmin. Helv. Chim. Acta 1962, 45, 675–685. [CrossRef]
Iqbal, N.; Khan, N.A.; Ferrante, A.; Trivellini, A.; Francini, A.; Khan, M.I.R. Ethylene Role in Plant Growth, Development and
Senescence: Interaction with Other Phytohormones. Front. Plant Sci. 2017, 8, 475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wasternack, C.; Hause, B. Jasmonates: Biosynthesis, perception, signal transduction and action in plant stress response, growth
and development. An update to the 2007 review in Annals of Botany. Ann. Bot. 2013, 111, 1021–1058. [CrossRef]
Ruan, J.; Zhou, Y.; Zhou, M.; Yan, J.; Khurshid, M.; Weng, W.; Cheng, J.; Zhang, K. Jasmonic Acid Signaling Pathway in Plants. Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 2479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chini, A.; Monte, I.; Zamarreño, A.M.; Hamberg, M.; Lassueur, S.; Reymond, P.; Weiss, S.; Stintzi, A.; Schaller, A.; Porzel, A.;
et al. An OPR3-independent pathway uses 4,5-didehydrojasmonate for jasmonate synthesis. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2018, 14, 171–178.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Xie, Z.; Nolan, T.M.; Jiang, H.; Yin, Y. AP2/ERF transcription factor regulatory networks in hormone and abiotic stress responses
in Arabidopsis. Front. Plant Sci. 2019, 10, 228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Riyazuddin, R.; Verma, R.; Singh, K.; Nisha, N.; Keisham, M.; Bhati, K.K.; Kim, S.T.; Gupta, R. Ethylene: A Master Regulator of
Salinity Stress Tolerance in Plants. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 959. [CrossRef]
Voesenek, L.A.C.J.; Sasidharan, R.; Visser, E.J.; Bailey-Serres, J. Flooding stress signaling through perturbations in oxygen,
ethylene, nitric oxide and light. New Phytol. 2015, 209, 39–43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Yang, Y.; Ou, B.; Zhang, J.; Si, W.; Gu, H.; Qin, G.; Qu, L. The Arabidopsis Mediator subunit MED16 regulates iron homeostasis by
associating with EIN 3/EIL1 through subunit MED25. Plant J. 2014, 77, 838–851. [CrossRef]

74.
75.

76.
77.

78.

79.
80.
81.
82.
83.

84.
85.
86.

87.

88.

89.
90.
91.
92.

93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.

Huang, J.; Zhao, X.; Bürger, M.; Wang, Y.; Chory, J. Two interacting ethylene response factors regulate heat stress response. Plant
Cell 2020, 33, 338–357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cheng, M.-C.; Liao, P.-M.; Kuo, W.-W.; Lin, T.-P. The Arabidopsis ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR1 Regulates Abiotic StressResponsive Gene Expression by Binding to Different cis-Acting Elements in Response to Different Stress Signals. Plant Physiol.
2013, 162, 1566–1582. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chini, A.; Gimenez-Ibanez, S.; Goossens, A.; Solano, R. Redundancy and specificity in jasmonate signalling. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.
2016, 33, 147–156. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Earley, K.; Lawrence, R.J.; Pontes, O.; Reuther, R.; Enciso, A.J.; Silva, M.; Neves, N.; Gross, M.; Viegas, W.; Pikaard, C.S. Erasure of
histone acetylation by Arabidopsis I6 mediates large-scale gene silencing in nucleolar dominance. Genes Dev. 2006, 20, 1283–1293.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zhu, Z.; An, F.; Feng, Y.; Li, P.; Xue, L.A.M.; Jiang, Z.; Kim, J.M.; To, T.K.; Li, W.; Zhang, X.; et al. Derepression of ethylene-stabilized
transcription factors (EIN3/EIL1) mediates jasmonate and ethylene signaling synergy in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2011, 108, 12539–12544. [CrossRef]
Zhu, Z.; Lee, B. Friends or Foes: New Insights in Jasmonate and Ethylene Co-Actions. Plant Cell Physiol. 2014, 56, 414–420.
[CrossRef]
Cui, M.; Lin, Y.; Zu, Y.; Efferth, T.; Li, D.; Tang, Z. Ethylene increases accumulation of compatible solutes and decreases oxidative
stress to improve plant tolerance to water stress in Arabidopsis. J. Plant Biol. 2015, 58, 193–201. [CrossRef]
Kim, J.; To, T.K.; Matsui, A.; Tanoi, K.; Kobayashi, N.I.; Matsuda, F.; Habu, Y.; Ogawa, D.; Sakamoto, T.; Matsunaga, S.
Acetate-mediated novel survival strategy against drought in plants. Nat. Plants 2017, 3, 17097. [CrossRef]
Fu, J.; Wu, H.; Ma, S.; Xiang, D.; Liu, R.; Xiong, L. OsJAZ1 Attenuates Drought Resistance by Regulating JA and ABA Signaling in
Rice. Front. Plant Sci. 2017, 8, 2108. [CrossRef]
Jin, J.; Duan, J.; Shan, C.; Mei, Z.; Chen, H.; Feng, H.; Zhu, J.; Cai, W. Ethylene insensitive3-like2 (OsEIL2) confers stress sensitivity
by regulating OsBURP16, the β subunit of polygalacturonase (PG1β-like) subfamily gene in rice. Plant Sci. 2019, 292, 110353.
[CrossRef]
Riemann, M.; Dhakarey, R.; Hazman, M.; Miro, B.; Kohli, A.; Nick, P. Exploring jasmonates in the hormonal network of drought
and salinity responses. Front. Plant Sci. 2015, 6, 1077. [CrossRef]
Zhu, C.; Gan, L.; Shen, Z.; Xia, K. Interactions between jasmonates and ethylene in the regulation of root hair development in
Arabidopsis. J. Exp. Bot. 2006, 57, 1299–1308. [CrossRef]
Zhang, X.; Zhu, Z.; An, F.; Hao, D.; Li, P.; Song, J.; Yi, C.; Guo, H. Jasmonate-Activated MYC2 Represses ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 Activity to Antagonize Ethylene-Promoted Apical Hook Formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2014, 26, 1105–1117.
[CrossRef]
Song, S.; Huang, H.; Gao, H.; Wang, J.; Wu, D.; Liu, X.; Yang, S.; Zhai, Q.; Li, C.; Qi, T.; et al. Interaction between MYC2 and
ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 Modulates Antagonism between Jasmonate and Ethylene Signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2014,
26, 263–279. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Van Moerkercke, A.; Duncan, O.; Zander, M.; Simura, J.; Broda, M.; Vanden Bossche, R.; Lewsey, M.G.; Lama, S.; Singh,
K.B.; Ljung, K.; et al. A MYC2/MYC3/MYC4-dependent transcription factor network regulates water spray-responsive gene
expression and jasmonate levels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019, 116, 23345–23356. [CrossRef]
Lorenzo, O.; Piqueras, R.; Sánchez-serrano, J.J.; Solano, R. ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR1 integrates signals from ethylene
and jasmonate pathways in plant defense. Plant Cell 2003, 15, 165–178. [CrossRef]
Zander, M.; Lewsey, M.G.; Clark, N.M.; Yin, L.; Bartlett, A.; Guzmán, J.P.S.; Hann, E.; Langford, A.E.; Jow, B.; Wise, A.; et al.
Integrated multi-omics framework of the plant response to jasmonic acid. Nat. Plants 2020, 6, 290–302. [CrossRef]
Hao, D.; Jin, L.; Wen, X.; Yu, F.; Xie, Q.; Guo, H. The RING E3 ligase SDIR1 destabilizes EBF1/EBF2 and modulates the ethylene
response to ambient temperature fluctuations in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2021, 118, e2024592118. [CrossRef]
Zhang, Y.; Yang, C.; Li, Y.; Zheng, N.; Chen, H.; Zhao, Q.; Gao, T.; Guo, H.; Xie, Q. SDIR1 Is a RING Finger E3 Ligase That
Positively Regulates Stress-Responsive Abscisic Acid Signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2007, 19, 1912–1929. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Dar, N.A.; Amin, I.; Wani, W.; Wani, S.A.; Shikari, A.B.; Wani, S.H.; Masoodi, K.Z. Abscisic acid: A key regulator of abiotic stress
tolerance in plants. Plant Gene 2017, 11, 106–111. [CrossRef]
Emenecker, R.J.; Strader, L.C. Auxin-Abscisic Acid Interactions in Plant Growth and Development. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 281.
[CrossRef]
Sah, S.K.; Reddy, K.R.; Li, J. Abscisic acid and abiotic stress tolerance in crop plants. Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 571. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Müller, M. Foes or Friends: ABA and Ethylene Interaction under Abiotic Stress. Plants 2021, 10, 448. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kumar, D.; Hazra, S.; Datta, R.; Chattopadhyay, S. Transcriptome analysis of Arabidopsis mutants suggests a crosstalk between
ABA, ethylene and GSH against combined cold and osmotic stress. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 1–13. [CrossRef]
Marczak, M.; Ciesla, A.; Janicki, M.; Kasprowicz-Maluski, A.; Kubiak, P.; Ludwikow, A. Protein Phosphatases Type 2C Group A
Interact with and Regulate the Stability of ACC Synthase 7 in Arabidopsis. Cells 2020, 9, 978. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ueda, H.; Ito, T.; Inoue, R.; Masuda, Y.; Nagashima, Y.; Kozuka, T.; Kusaba, M. Genetic Interaction Among Phytochrome, Ethylene
and Abscisic Acid Signaling During Dark-Induced Senescence in Arabidopsis Thaliana. Front. Plant Sci. 2020, 11, 564. [CrossRef]

100. Lei, G.; Shen, M.; Li, Z.-G.; Zhang, B.; Duan, K.-X.; Wang, N.; Cao, Y.-R.; Zhang, W.-K.; Ma, B.; Ling, H.-Q.; et al. EIN2 regulates salt
stress response and interacts with a MA3 domain-containing protein ECIP1 in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Environ. 2011, 34, 1678–1692.
[CrossRef]
101. Cao, W.-H.; Liu, J.; He, X.-J.; Mu, R.-L.; Zhou, H.-L.; Chen, S.-Y.; Zhang, J.-S. Modulation of Ethylene Responses Affects Plant
Salt-Stress Responses. Plant Physiol. 2006, 143, 707–719. [CrossRef]
102. Achard, P.; Chen, D.; De Grauwe, L.; Decat, J.; Schoutteten, H.; Moritz, T.; Van Der Straeten, D.; Peng, J.; Harberd, N.P. Integration
of Plant Responses to Environmentally Activated Phytohormonal Signals. Science 2006, 311, 91–94. [CrossRef]
103. Munemasa, S.; Hauser, F.; Park, J.; Waadt, R.; Brandt, B.; Schroeder, J.I. Mechanisms of abscisic acid-mediated control of stomatal
aperture. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2015, 28, 154–162. [CrossRef]
104. Madhavan, S.; Chrominiski, A.; Smith, B.N. Effect of Ethylene on Stomatal Opening in Tomato and Carnation Leaves. Plant Cell
Physiol. 1983, 24. [CrossRef]
105. Tanaka, Y.; Sano, T.; Tamaoki, M.; Nakajima, N.; Kondo, N.; Hasezawa, S. Ethylene Inhibits Abscisic Acid-Induced Stomatal
Closure in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 2005, 138, 2337–2343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Benlloch-González, M.; Arquero, O.; Fournier, J.M.; Barranco, D.; Benlloch, M. K+ starvation inhibits water-stress-induced
stomatal closure. J. Plant Physiol. 2008, 165, 623–630. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Iqbal, N.; Nazar, R.; Syeed, S.; Masood, A.; Khan, N.A. Exogenously-sourced ethylene increases stomatal conductance, photosynthesis, and growth under optimal and deficient nitrogen fertilization in mustard. J. Exp. Bot. 2011, 62, 4955–4963. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
108. Watkins, J.M.; Hechler, P.J.; Muday, G.K. Ethylene-Induced Flavonol Accumulation in Guard Cells Suppresses Reactive Oxygen
Species and Moderates Stomatal Aperture. Plant Physiol. 2014, 164, 1707–1717. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Desikan, R.; Last, K.; Harrett-Williams, R.; Tagliavia, C.; Harter, K.; Hooley, R.; Hancock, J.T.; Neill, S.J. Ethylene-induced stomatal
closure in Arabidopsis occurs via AtrbohF-mediated hydrogen peroxide synthesis. Plant J. 2006, 47, 907–916. [CrossRef]
110. Shi, C.; Qi, C.; Ren, H.; Huang, A.; Hei, S.; She, X. Ethylene mediates brassinosteroid-induced stomatal closure via Gα proteinactivated hydrogen peroxide and nitric oxide production in Arabidopsis. Plant J. 2015, 82, 280–301. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Nazareno, A.L.; Hernandez, B. A mathematical model of the interaction of abscisic acid, ethylene and methyl jasmonate on
stomatal closure in plants. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0171065. [CrossRef]
112. Xu, Z.-S.; Xia, L.-Q.; Chen, M.; Cheng, X.-G.; Zhang, R.-Y.; Li, L.-C.; Zhao, Y.-X.; Lu, Y.; Ni, Z.-Y.; Liu, L.; et al. Isolation and
molecular characterization of the Triticum aestivum L. ethylene-responsive factor 1 (TaERF1) that increases multiple stress
tolerance. Plant Mol. Biol. 2007, 65, 719–732. [CrossRef]
113. Xing, L.; Di, Z.; Yang, W.; Liu, J.; Li, M.; Wang, X.; Cui, C.; Wang, X.; Zhang, R.; Xiao, J. Overexpression of ERF1-V from Haynaldia
villosa can enhance the resistance of wheat to powdery mildew and increase the tolerance to salt and drought stresses. Front.
Plant Sci. 2017, 8. [CrossRef]
114. Wu, L.; Chen, X.; Ren, H.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, H.; Wang, J.; Wang, X.-C.; Huang, R. ERF protein JERF1 that transcriptionally
modulates the expression of abscisic acid biosynthesis-related gene enhances the tolerance under salinity and cold in tobacco.
Planta 2007, 226, 815–825. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Quan, R.; Hu, S.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, Z.; Huang, R. Overexpression of an ERF transcription factorTSRF1improves rice
drought tolerance. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2010, 8, 476–488. [CrossRef]
116. Dong, Z.; Yu, Y.; Li, S.; Wang, J.; Tang, S.; Huang, R. Abscisic Acid Antagonizes Ethylene Production through the ABI4-Mediated
Transcriptional Repression of ACS4 and ACS8 in Arabidopsis. Mol. Plant 2015, 9, 126–135. [CrossRef]
117. Agurla, S.; Gahir, S.; Munemasa, S.; Murata, Y.; Raghavendra, A.S. Mechanism of stomatal closure in plants exposed to drought
and cold stress. In Survival Strategies in Extreme Cold and Desiccation; Springer: Singapore, 2018; pp. 215–232.
118. Khan, M.I.R.; Trivellini, A.; Chhillar, H.; Chopra, P.; Ferrante, A.; Khan, N.A.; Ismail, A.M. The significance and functions of
ethylene in flooding stress tolerance in plants. Environ. Exp. Bot. 2020, 179, 104188. [CrossRef]
119. Benschop, J.J.; Jackson, M.B.; Gühl, K.; Vreeburg, R.A.M.; Croker, S.J.; Peeters, A.J.M.; Voesenek, L.A.C.J. Contrasting interactions
between ethylene and abscisic acid in Rumex species differing in submergence tolerance. Plant J. 2005, 44, 756–768. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
120. Benschop, J.J.; Bou, J.; Peeters, A.J.; Wagemaker, N.; Gühl, K.; Ward, D.; Hedden, P.; Moritz, T.; Voesenek, L.A. Long-Term
Submergence-Induced Elongation in Rumex palustris Requires Abscisic Acid-Dependent Biosynthesis of Gibberellin1. Plant
Physiol. 2006, 141, 1644–1652. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Saika, H.; Okamoto, M.; Miyoshi, K.; Kushiro, T.; Shinoda, S.; Jikumaru, Y.; Fujimoto, M.; Arikawa, T.; Takahashi, H.;
Ando, M.; et al. Ethylene Promotes Submergence-Induced Expression of OsABA8ox1, a Gene that Encodes ABA 8’-Hydroxylase
in Rice. Plant Cell Physiol. 2006, 48, 287–298. [CrossRef]
122. Arroyo, A.; Bossi, F.; Finkelstein, R.R.; León, P. Three Genes That Affect Sugar Sensing (Abscisic Acid Insensitive 4, Abscisic Acid
Insensitive 5, and Constitutive Triple Response 1) Are Differentially Regulated by Glucose in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 2003,
133, 231–242. [CrossRef]
123. Benschop, J.J.; Millenaar, F.F.; Smeets, M.E.; Van Zanten, M.; Voesenek, L.; Peeters, A.J. Abscisic Acid Antagonizes EthyleneInduced Hyponastic Growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 2006, 143, 1013–1023. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Ortega-Martínez, O.; Pernas, M.; Carol, R.J.; Dolan, L. Ethylene Modulates Stem Cell Division in the Arabidopsis thaliana Root.
Science 2007, 317, 507–510. [CrossRef]

125. Linkies, A.; Müller, K.; Morris, K.; Turečková, V.; Wenk, M.; Cadman, C.S.; Corbineau, F.; Strnad, M.; Lynn, J.R.;
Finch-Savage, W.E.; et al. Ethylene Interacts with Abscisic Acid to Regulate Endosperm Rupture during Germination: A
Comparative Approach Using Lepidium sativum and Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 2009, 21, 3803–3822. [CrossRef]
126. Zhang, H.; Han, W.; De Smet, I.; Talboys, P.; Loya, R.; Hassan, A.; Rong, H.; Jürgens, G.; Knox, J.P.; Wang, M.-H. ABA promotes
quiescence of the quiescent centre and suppresses stem cell differentiation in the Arabidopsis primary root meristem. Plant J.
2010, 64, 764–774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Jung, J.K.H.M.; McCouch, S.R.M. Getting to the roots of it: Genetic and hormonal control of root architecture. Front. Plant Sci.
2013, 4, 186. [CrossRef]
128. Chang, K.N.; Zhong, S.; Weirauch, M.T.; Hon, G.; Pelizzola, M.; Li, H.; Huang, S.-S.C.; Schmitz, R.; Urich, M.A.; Kuo, D.; et al.
Temporal transcriptional response to ethylene gas drives growth hormone cross-regulation in Arabidopsis. eLife 2013, 2, e00675.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
129. Song, L.; Huang, S.-S.C.; Wise, A.; Castanon, R.; Nery, J.R.; Chen, H.; Watanabe, M.; Thomas, J.; Bar-Joseph, Z.; Ecker, J.R.
A transcription factor hierarchy defines an environmental stress response network. Science 2016, 354, aag1550. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
130. Planas-Riverola, A.; Gupta, A.; Betegón-Putze, I.; Bosch, N.; Ibañes, M.; Caño-Delgado, A.I. Brassinosteroid signaling in plant
development and adaptation to stress. Development 2019, 146, dev151894. [CrossRef]
131. Nolan, T.M.; Vukašinović, N.; Liu, D.; Russinova, E.; Yin, Y. Brassinosteroids: Multidimensional Regulators of Plant Growth,
Development, and Stress Responses. Plant Cell 2019, 32, 295–318. [CrossRef]
132. Jiroutova, P.; Oklestkova, J.; Strnad, M. Crosstalk between Brassinosteroids and Ethylene during Plant Growth and under Abiotic
Stress Conditions. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 3283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Wang, B.; Zhang, J.; Xia, X.; Zhang, W.-H. Ameliorative effect of brassinosteroid and ethylene on germination of cucumber seeds
in the presence of sodium chloride. Plant Growth Regul. 2011, 65, 407–413. [CrossRef]
134. Zhu, T.; Deng, X.; Zhou, X.; Zhu, L.; Zou, L.; Li, P.; Zhang, D.; Lin, H. Ethylene and hydrogen peroxide are involved in
brassinosteroid-induced salt tolerance in tomato. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 35392. [CrossRef]
135. Wei, L.-J.; Deng, X.-G.; Zhu, T.; Zheng, T.; Li, P.-X.; Wu, J.-Q.; Zhang, D.-W.; Lin, H.-H. Ethylene is Involved in Brassinosteroids
Induced Alternative Respiratory Pathway in Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) Seedlings Response to Abiotic Stress. Front. Plant
Sci. 2015, 6, 982. [CrossRef]
136. Schmitz, A.; Folsom, J.J.; Jikamaru, Y.; Ronald, P.; Walia, H. SUB 1 A-mediated submergence tolerance response in rice involves
differential regulation of the brassinosteroid pathway. New Phytol. 2013, 198, 1060–1070. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Lavy, M.; Estelle, M. Mechanisms of auxin signaling. Development 2016, 143, 3226–3229. [CrossRef]
138. Zhao, Y. Auxin biosynthesis. Arab. Book 2014, 12, e0173. [CrossRef]
139. Enders, T.A.; Strader, L.C. Auxin activity: Past, present, and future. Am. J. Bot. 2015, 102, 180–196. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Muday, G.K.; Rahman, A.; Binder, B.M. Auxin and ethylene: Collaborators or competitors? Trends Plant Sci. 2012, 17, 181–195.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Stepanova, A.N.; Alonso, J.M. From Ethylene-Auxin Interactions to Auxin Biosynthesis and Signal Integration. Plant Cell 2019,
31, 1393–1394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Mazzoni-Putman, S.M.; Brumos, J.; Zhao, C.; Alonso, J.M.; Stepanova, A.N. Auxin Interactions with Other Hormones in Plant
Development. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2021, 13, a039990. [CrossRef]
143. Koevoets, I.T.; Venema, J.H.; Elzenga, J.T.M.; Testerink, C. Roots Withstanding their Environment: Exploiting Root System
Architecture Responses to Abiotic Stress to Improve Crop Tolerance. Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 1335. [CrossRef]
144. Bojórquez-Quintal, E.; Escalante-Magaña, C.; Echevarría-Machado, I.; Martínez-Estévez, M. Aluminum, a Friend or Foe of Higher
Plants in Acid Soils. Front. Plant Sci. 2017, 8, 1767. [CrossRef]
145. Shen, H.; Hou, N.; Schlicht, M.; Wan, Y.; Mancuso, S.; Baluska, F. Aluminium toxicity targets PIN2 in Arabidopsis root apices:
Effects on PIN2 endocytosis, vesicular recycling, and polar auxin transport. Sci. Bull. 2008, 53, 2480–2487. [CrossRef]
146. Yang, Z.B.; Geng, X.Y.; He, C.M.; Zhang, F.; Wang, R.; Horst, W.J.; Ding, Z.J. TAA1-Regulated Local Auxin Biosynthesis in
the Root-Apex Transition Zone Mediates the Aluminum-Induced Inhibition of Root Growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2014,
26, 2889–2904. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Liu, G.; Gao, S.; Tian, H.; Wu, W.; Robert, H.S.; Ding, Z. Local Transcriptional Control of YUCCA Regulates Auxin Promoted
Root-Growth Inhibition in Response to Aluminium Stress in Arabidopsis. PLoS Genet. 2016, 12, e1006360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Yang, Z.; Liu, G.; Liu, J.; Zhang, B.; Meng, W.; Müller, B.; Hayashi, K.; Zhang, X.; Zhao, Z.; De Smet, I.; et al. Synergistic action
of auxin and cytokinin mediates aluminum—Induced root growth inhibition in Arabidopsis. EMBO Rep. 2017, 18, 1213–1230.
[CrossRef]
149. Wakeel, A.; Ali, I.; Upreti, S.; Azizullah, A.; Liu, B.; Khan, A.R.; Huang, L.; Wu, M.; Gan, Y. Ethylene mediates dichromate-induced
inhibition of primary root growth by altering AUX1 expression and auxin accumulation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell
Environ. 2018, 41, 1453–1467. [CrossRef]
150. Wakeel, A.; Gan, Y. A model for the ethylene-mediated auxin distribution under Cr(VI) stress in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant
Signal. Behav. 2018, 13, e1473685. [CrossRef]
151. Li, G.; Song, H.; Li, B.; Kronzucker, H.J.; Shi, W. Auxin resistant1 and PIN-FORMED2 protect lateral root formation in Arabidopsis
under iron stress. Plant Physiol. 2015, 169, 2608–2623.

152. Li, J.; Xu, H.-H.; Liu, W.-C.; Zhang, X.-W.; Lu, Y.-T. Ethylene Inhibits Root Elongation during Alkaline Stress through AUXIN1
and Associated Changes in Auxin Accumulation. Plant Physiol. 2015, 168, 1777–1791. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Gratão, P.; Monteiro, C.C.; Carvalho, R.F.; Tezotto, T.; Piotto, F.; Peres, L.; Azevedo, R.A. Biochemical dissection of diageotropica
and Never ripe tomato mutants to Cd-stressful conditions. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2012, 56, 79–96. [CrossRef]
154. Gruber, B.D.; Giehl, R.F.; Friedel, S.; von Wirén, N. Plasticity of the Arabidopsis root system under nutrient deficiencies. Plant
Physiol. 2013, 163, 161–179. [CrossRef]
155. Liu, M.; Zhang, H.; Fang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Jin, C. Auxin acts downstream of ethylene and nitric oxide to regulate magnesium
deficiency-induced root hair development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol. 2018, 59, 1452–1465. [CrossRef]
156. Martín-Rejano, E.M.; Camacho-Cristóbal, J.J.; Herrera-Rodríguez, M.B.; Rexach, J.; Navarro-Gochicoa, M.T.; Gonzalez-Fontes,
A. Auxin and ethylene are involved in the responses of root system architecture to low boron supply in Arabidopsis seedlings.
Physiol. Plant. 2011, 142, 170–178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
157. Camacho-Cristóbal, J.J.; Martín-Rejano, E.M.; Herrera-Rodríguez, M.B.; Navarro-Gochicoa, M.T.; Rexach, J.; González-Fontes, A.
Boron deficiency inhibits root cell elongation via an ethylene/auxin/ROS-dependent pathway in Arabidopsis seedlings. J. Exp.
Bot. 2015, 66, 3831–3840. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Jacobsen, A.G.R.; Jervis, G.; Xu, J.; Topping, J.F.; Lindsey, K. Root growth responses to mechanical impedance are regulated by a
network of ROS, ethylene and auxin signalling in Arabidopsis. New Phytol. 2021, 231, 225–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Sasidharan, R.; Voesenek, L.A.C.J. Ethylene-Mediated Acclimations to Flooding Stress. Plant Physiol. 2015, 169, 3–12. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
160. Visser, E.; Cohen, J.; Barendse, G.; Blom, C.; Voesenek, L. An Ethylene-Mediated Increase in Sensitivity to Auxin Induces
Adventitious Root Formation in Flooded Rumex palustris Sm. Plant Physiol. 1996, 112, 1687–1692. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Vidoz, M.L.; Loreti, E.; Mensuali, A.; Alpi, A.; Perata, P. Hormonal interplay during adventitious root formation in flooded tomato
plants. Plant J. 2010, 63, 551–562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Qi, X.; Li, Q.; Ma, X.; Qian, C.; Wang, H.; Ren, N.; Shen, C.; Huang, S.; Xu, X.; Xu, Q.; et al. Waterlogging—Induced adventitious
root formation in cucumber is regulated by ethylene and auxin through reactive oxygen species signalling. Plant Cell Environ.
2018, 42, 1458–1470. [CrossRef]
163. Yamauchi, T.; Shimamura, S.; Nakazono, M.; Mochizuki, T. Aerenchyma formation in crop species: A review. Field Crop. Res.
2013, 152, 8–16. [CrossRef]
164. Yamauchi, T.; Tanaka, A.; Tsutsumi, N.; Inukai, Y.; Nakazono, M. A Role for Auxin in Ethylene-Dependent Inducible Aerenchyma
Formation in Rice Roots. Plants 2020, 9, 610. [CrossRef]
165. Zhong, S.; Shi, H.; Xue, C.; Wang, L.; Xi, Y.; Li, J.; Quail, P.H.; Deng, X.W.; Guo, H. A Molecular Framework of Light-Controlled
Phytohormone Action in Arabidopsis. Curr. Biol. 2012, 22, 1530–1535. [CrossRef]
166. Kim, J.Y.; Park, Y.-J.; Lee, J.-H.; Kim, Z.H.; Park, C.-M. EIN3-Mediated Ethylene Signaling Attenuates Auxin Response during
Hypocotyl Thermomorphogenesis. Plant Cell Physiol. 2021, 62, 708–720. [CrossRef]
167. Fei, Q.; Wei, S.; Zhou, Z.; Gao, H.; Li, X. Adaptation of root growth to increased ambient temperature requires auxin and ethylene
coordination in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Rep. 2017, 36, 1507–1518. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
168. Binenbaum, J.; Weinstain, R.; Shani, E. Gibberellin Localization and Transport in Plants. Trends Plant Sci. 2018, 23, 410–421.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
169. Hernández-García, J.; Briones-Moreno, A.; Blázquez, M.A. Origin and evolution of gibberellin signaling and metabolism in plants.
Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 2020, 109, 46–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
170. Hattori, Y.; Nagai, K.; Furukawa, S.; Song, X.-J.; Kawano, R.; Sakakibara, H.; Wu, J.; Matsumoto, T.; Yoshimura, A.; Kitano, H.; et al.
The ethylene response factors SNORKEL1 and SNORKEL2 allow rice to adapt to deep water. Nature 2009, 460, 1026–1030.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
171. Bailey-Serres, J.; Fukao, T.; Gibbs, D.; Holdsworth, M.; Lee, S.C.; Licausi, F.; Perata, P.; Voesenek, L.; van Dongen, J. Making sense
of low oxygen sensing. Trends Plant Sci. 2012, 17, 129–138. [CrossRef]
172. Kuroha, T.; Nagai, K.; Gamuyao, R.; Wang, D.R.; Furuta, T.; Nakamori, M.; Kitaoka, T.; Adachi, K.; Minami, A.; Mori, Y.; et al.
Ethylene-gibberellin signaling underlies adaptation of rice to periodic flooding. Science 2018, 361, 181–186. [CrossRef]
173. Fukao, T.; Xu, K.; Ronald, P.C.; Bailey-Serres, J. A Variable Cluster of Ethylene Response Factor–Like Genes Regulates Metabolic
and Developmental Acclimation Responses to Submergence in Rice. Plant Cell 2006, 18, 2021–2034. [CrossRef]
174. Xu, K.; Xu, X.; Fukao, T.; Canlas, P.; Maghirang-Rodriguez, R.; Heuer, S.; Ismail, A.M.; Bailey-Serres, J.; Ronald, P.C.; Mackill, D.J.
Sub1A is an ethylene-response-factor-like gene that confers submergence tolerance to rice. Nat. Cell Biol. 2006, 442, 705–708.
[CrossRef]
175. Fukao, T.; Bailey-Serres, J. Submergence tolerance conferred by Sub1A is mediated by SLR1 and SLRL1 restriction of gibberellin
responses in rice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008, 105, 16814–16819. [CrossRef]
176. Lin, C.-C.; Chao, Y.-T.; Chen, W.-C.; Ho, H.-Y.; Chou, M.-Y.; Li, Y.-R.; Wu, Y.-L.; Yang, H.-A.; Hsieh, H.; Lin, C.-S.; et al. Regulatory
cascade involving transcriptional and N-end rule pathways in rice under submergence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019,
116, 3300–3309. [CrossRef]
177. Dubois, M.; Skirycz, A.; Claeys, H.; Maleux, K.; Dhondt, S.; De Bodt, S.; Bossche, R.V.; De Milde, L.; Yoshizumi, T.;
Matsui, M.; et al. Ethylene response factor6 Acts as a Central Regulator of Leaf Growth under Water-Limiting Conditions in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 2013, 162, 319–332. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

178. Dubois, M.; Broeck, L.V.D.; Claeys, H.; Van Vlierberghe, K.; Matsui, M.; Inzé, D. The Ethylene Response factors ERF6 and ERF11
Antagonistically Regulate Mannitol-Induced Growth Inhibition in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 2015, 169, 166–179. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
179. Zhou, X.; Zhang, Z.-L.; Park, J.; Tyler, L.; Yusuke, J.; Qiu, K.; Nam, E.A.; Lumba, S.; Desveaux, D.; McCourt, P.; et al. The ERF11
Transcription Factor Promotes Internode Elongation by Activating Gibberellin Biosynthesis and Signaling. Plant Physiol. 2016,
171, 2760–2770. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
180. Broeck, L.V.D.; Dubois, M.; Vermeersch, M.; Storme, V.; Matsui, M.; Inzé, D. From network to phenotype: The dynamic wiring of
an Arabidopsis transcriptional network induced by osmotic stress. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2017, 13, 961. [CrossRef]
181. An, F.; Zhang, X.; Zhu, Z.; Ji, Y.; He, W.; Jiang, Z.; Li, M.; Guo, H. Coordinated regulation of apical hook development by
gibberellins and ethylene in etiolated Arabidopsis seedlings. Cell Res. 2012, 22, 915–927. [CrossRef]
182. Lefevere, H.; Bauters, L.; Gheysen, G. Salicylic Acid Biosynthesis in Plants. Front. Plant Sci. 2020, 11, 338. [CrossRef]
183. Fu, Z.Q.; Yan, S.; Saleh, A.; Wang, W.; Ruble, J.; Oka, N.; Mohan, R.; Spoel, S.; Tada, Y.; Zheng, N.; et al. NPR3 and NPR4 are
receptors for the immune signal salicylic acid in plants. Nature 2012, 486, 228–232. [CrossRef]
184. Iqbal, N.; Masood, A.; Khan, N.A. Phytohormones in salinity tolerance: Ethylene and gibberellins cross talk. In Phytohormones and
Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Plants; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2012; pp. 77–98.
185. Khan, M.I.R.; Fatma, M.; Per, T.S.; Anjum, N.A.; Khan, N.A. Salicylic acid-induced abiotic stress tolerance and underlying
mechanisms in plants. Front. Plant Sci. 2015, 6, 462. [CrossRef]
186. Peng, Y.; Yang, J.; Li, X.; Zhang, Y. Salicylic Acid: Biosynthesis and Signaling. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 2021, 72, 761–791. [CrossRef]
187. Khan, M.I.R.; Iqbal, N.; Masood, A.; Per, T.S.; Khan, N.A. Salicylic acid alleviates adverse effects of heat stress on photosynthesis
through changes in proline production and ethylene formation. Plant Signal. Behav. 2013, 8, e26374. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Khan, M.I.R.; Asgher, M.; Khan, N.A. Alleviation of salt-induced photosynthesis and growth inhibition by salicylic acid involves
glycinebetaine and ethylene in mungbean (Vigna radiata L.). Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2014, 80, 67–74. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
189. Ahmed, W.; Imran, M.; Yaseen, M.; Haq, T.U.; Jamshaid, M.U.; Rukh, S.; Ikram, R.M.; Ali, M.; Ali, A.; Maqbool, M.; et al. Role of
salicylic acid in regulating ethylene and physiological characteristics for alleviating salinity stress on germination, growth and
yield of sweet pepper. PeerJ 2020, 8, e8475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
190. Nazar, R.; Umar, S.; Khan, N.; Sareer, O. Salicylic acid supplementation improves photosynthesis and growth in mustard through
changes in proline accumulation and ethylene formation under drought stress. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2015, 98, 84–94. [CrossRef]
191. Leslie, C.A.; Romani, R.J. Salicylic acid: A new inhibitor of ethylene biosynthesis. Plant Cell Rep. 1986, 5, 144–146. [CrossRef]
192. Rao, M.V.; Lee, H.-I.; Davis, K.R. Ozone-induced ethylene production is dependent on salicylic acid, and both salicylic acid and
ethylene act in concert to regulate ozone-induced cell death. Plant J. 2002, 32, 447–456. [CrossRef]
193. Ogawa, D.; Nakajima, N.; Sano, T.; Tamaoki, M.; Aono, M.; Kubo, A.; Kanna, M.; Ioki, M.; Kamada, H.; Saji, H. Salicylic Acid
Accumulation Under O3 Exposure is Regulated by Ethylene in Tobacco Plants. Plant Cell Physiol. 2005, 46, 1062–1072. [CrossRef]
194. Thaler, J.S.; Humphrey, P.T.; Whiteman, N.K. Evolution of jasmonate and salicylate signal crosstalk. Trends Plant Sci. 2012,
17, 260–270. [CrossRef]
195. Kieber, J.J.; Schaller, G.E. Cytokinin signaling in plant development. Development 2018, 145, dev149344. [CrossRef]
196. Hutchison, C.E.; Li, J.; Argueso, C.; Gonzalez, M.; Lee, E.; Lewis, M.W.; Maxwell, B.B.; Perdue, T.D.; Schaller, G.E.;
Alonso, J.M.; et al. The Arabidopsis Histidine Phosphotransfer Proteins Are Redundant Positive Regulators of Cytokinin
Signaling. Plant Cell 2006, 18, 3073–3087. [CrossRef]
197. Zwack, P.J.; Rashotte, A.M. Interactions between cytokinin signalling and abiotic stress responses. J. Exp. Bot. 2015, 66, 4863–4871.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
198. Vogel, J.; Woeste, K.E.; Theologis, A.; Kieber, J.J. Recessive and dominant mutations in the ethylene biosynthetic gene ACS5
of Arabidopsis confer cytokinin insensitivity and ethylene overproduction, respectively. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1998,
95, 4766–4771. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
199. Chae, H.S.; Faure, F.; Kieber, J.J. The eto1, eto2, and eto3 Mutations and Cytokinin Treatment Increase Ethylene Biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis by Increasing the Stability of ACS Protein. Plant Cell 2003, 15, 545–559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
200. Hansen, M.; Chae, H.S.; Kieber, J.J. Regulation of ACS protein stability by cytokinin and brassinosteroid. Plant J. 2009, 57, 606–614.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
201. Jalmi, S.K.; Bhagat, P.K.; Verma, D.; Noryang, S.; Tayyeba, S.; Singh, K.; Sharma, D.; Sinha, A.K. Traversing the Links between
Heavy Metal Stress and Plant Signaling. Front. Plant Sci. 2018, 9, 12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
202. Artner, C.; Benkova, E. Ethylene and Cytokinin: Partners in Root Growth Regulation. Mol. Plant 2019, 12, 1312–1314. [CrossRef]
203. Skalak, J.; Nicolas, K.L.; Vankova, R.; Hejatko, J. Signal Integration in Plant Abiotic Stress Responses via Multistep Phosphorelay
Signaling. Front. Plant Sci. 2021, 12. [CrossRef]
204. Yamauchi, T.; Yoshioka, M.; Fukazawa, A.; Mori, H.; Nishizawa, N.K.; Tsutsumi, N.; Yoshioka, H.; Nakazono, M. An NADPH
Oxidase RBOH Functions in Rice Roots during Lysigenous Aerenchyma Formation under Oxygen-Deficient Conditions. Plant
Cell 2017, 29, 775–790. [CrossRef]
205. Yamauchi, T.; Tanaka, A.; Inahashi, H.; Nishizawa, N.K.; Tsutsumi, N.; Inukai, Y.; Nakazono, M. Fine control of aerenchyma
and lateral root development through AUX/IAA- and ARF-dependent auxin signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019,
116, 20770–20775. [CrossRef]

206. Tavares, E.Q.P.; Grandis, A.; Lembke, C.G.; Souza, G.M.; Purgatto, E.; De Souza, A.P.; Buckeridge, M.S. Roles of auxin and
ethylene in aerenchyma formation in sugarcane roots. Plant Signal. Behav. 2018, 13, e1422464. [CrossRef]
207. Ponce, G.; Barlow, P.W.; Feldman, L.J.; Cassab, G.I. Auxin and ethylene interactions control mitotic activity of the quiescent centre,
root cap size, and pattern of cap cell differentiation in maize. Plant Cell Environ. 2005, 28, 719–732. [CrossRef]
208. Habben, J.E.; Bao, X.; Bate, N.J.; DeBruin, J.L.; Dolan, D.; Hasegawa, D.; Helentjaris, T.G.; Lafitte, R.H.; Lovan, N.;
Mo, H.; et al. Transgenic alteration of ethylene biosynthesis increases grain yield in maize under field drought-stress conditions.
Plant Biotechnol. J. 2014, 12, 685–693. [CrossRef]
209. Li, Z.; Zhang, X.; Zhao, Y.; Li, Y.; Zhang, G.; Peng, Z.; Zhang, J. Enhancing auxin accumulation in maize root tips improves root
growth and dwarfs plant height. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2017, 16, 86–99. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
210. Emerick, K.; Ronald, P.C. Sub1 Rice: Engineering Rice for Climate Change. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2019, 11, a034637.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
211. Licausi, F.; Kosmacz, M.; Weits, D.A.; Giuntoli, B.; Giorgi, F.M.; Voesenek, L.A.C.J.; Perata, P.; van Dongen, J.T. Oxygen sensing in
plants is mediated by an N-end rule pathway for protein destabilization. Nature 2011, 479, 419–422. [CrossRef]
212. Gasch, P.; Fundinger, M.; Müller, J.T.; Lee, T.; Bailey-Serres, J.; Mustroph, A. Redundant ERF-VII Transcription Factors Bind to an
Evolutionarily Conserved cis-Motif to Regulate Hypoxia-Responsive Gene Expression in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2015, 28, 160–180.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
213. Perata, P. Ethylene Signaling Controls Fast Oxygen Sensing in Plants. Trends Plant Sci. 2019, 25, 3–6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
214. Lamers, J.; van der Meer, T.; Testerink, C. How Plants Sense and Respond to Stressful Environments. Plant Physiol. 2020,
182, 1624–1635. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
215. Jung, J.-H.; Domijan, M.; Klose, C.; Biswas, S.; Ezer, D.; Gao, M.; Khattak, A.K.; Box, M.S.; Charoensawan, V.; Cortijo, S.; et al.
Phytochromes function as thermosensors in Arabidopsis. Science 2016, 354, 886–889. [CrossRef]
216. Legris, M.; Klose, C.; Burgie, E.S.; Rojas, C.C.R.; Neme, M.; Hiltbrunner, A.; Wigge, P.A.; Schäfer, E.; Vierstra, R.D.; Casal, J.J.
Phytochrome B integrates light and temperature signals in Arabidopsis. Science 2016, 354, 897–900. [CrossRef]
217. Yuan, F.; Yang, H.; Xue, Y.; Kong, D.; Ye, R.; Li, C.; Zhang, J.; Theprungsirikul, J.; Shrift, T.; Krichilsky, B.; et al. OSCA1 mediates
osmotic-stress-evoked Ca2+ increases vital for osmosensing in Arabidopsis. Nature 2014, 514, 367–371. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
218. Ding, Y.; Lv, J.; Shi, Y.; Gao, J.; Hua, J.; Song, C.; Gong, Z.; Yang, S. EGR 2 phosphatase regulates OST 1 kinase activity and freezing
tolerance in Arabidopsis. EMBO J. 2018, 38, e99819. [CrossRef]
219. Jiang, Z.; Zhou, X.; Tao, M.; Yuan, F.; Liu, L.; Wu, F.; Wu, X.; Xiang, Y.; Niu, Y.; Liu, F.; et al. Plant cell-surface GIPC sphingolipids
sense salt to trigger Ca2+ influx. Nature 2019, 572, 341–346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
220. Huot, B.; Yao, J.; Montgomery, B.L.; He, S.Y. Growth–Defense Tradeoffs in Plants: A Balancing Act to Optimize Fitness. Mol. Plant
2014, 7, 1267–1287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.