 		Terms of Endearment in Omani Arabic  		Khalsa Al Aghbari and Rahma Al Mahrooqi 1. IntroductionThis article examines how terms of endearment are used by female speakers of Omani Arabic in the country of Oman.1 It considers the main functions of terms of endearment, and documents which terms are most commonly used, how they are structurally formed, and what sort of semantics they invoke with interlocutors in Omani society.  Terms of endearment are crucial verbal linguistic tools used to address family members and close friends to invoke intimacy and strengthen bonds. Afful and Nartey define terms of endearment as “words or expressions used in an interactive, dyadic and face-to-face situation by a speaker to address or describe a person for whom the speaker feels love or affection” (2013:92). Afful and Nartey also argue that terms of endearment necessarily encompass forms such as sweet words, sweet talk, affectionate talk, soft words, and terms of affection. Dickey (1996) states that terms of endearment were “virtually never used in reference, even when they were standard in address” (1996:262).  There is a paucity of linguistic research on terms of endearment to date, while many studies vary considerably in their findings about terms of address. For example, Morford (1997) confirms that terms of address can be used to negotiate a cultural system, while Fitch (1991) shows that terms of address are used in a creative manner and involve metaphor and ironic language. Afful (1998) reveals how interlocutors could also add their own personal meaning to their addressees’ personal names. Agyekum (2006), on the other hand, argues that terms of address in Akan are diverse in nature; they are not random labels, but bear sociocultural functions. They give insight into the culture, philosophy, thought, religion, and environment of the Ghanaian people.  The study of endearment terms gives crucial insights into the culture and nature of a society. The unique semantics of these terms may also reveal how a [End Page 389] person constructs identity through the choice of a particular expression. Needless to say, such a choice may also reflect the interactional norms and practices of a society. Furthermore, terms of endearment serve as a good source of information about intimacy and linguistic creativity.2. Sociolinguistic profile: dialects, languages and culture of OmanOmani Arabic comprises a bundle of distinct dialects spoken in Oman—the Muscat, Dakhiliyah, Batinah, Dhahirah, Sharqiya, Wusta, and Dhofar Arabic dialects.2 This bundle of dialects has been little studied. To date, not much has been done to examine Oman’s sociolinguistic diversity; the few studies that do exist include Shaaban (1977), Glover (1988), Holes (1989), Rose (1997), Al Aghbari (2012), and Al Mahrooqi and Denman (2014). However, none have explored Omani Arabic terms of endearment or their implication for the culture and people of Oman until now. This is the first study to examine the linguistic and interactional features of terms of endearment in Omani Arabic.  Omani society is uniquely rich, both linguistically and dialectally. Although Arabic is the official language spoken in Oman, many minority languages are used throughout the country, such as Swahili, Lawati, Baluchi, and Urdu. Glover (1988) argues that the minority groups of these languages are assimilated Omanis of different origins. The Lawati group involves the Baharnah merchants who hailed from the Persian Coast, while the Swahili group migrated from Africa during the time when its east coast was under the control of Oman; at that time, Zanzibar, Kenya and Tanzania were merged with Oman under one ruler. It is argued by Shaaban (1977) that the Baluchis constitute the largest minority in Oman, as they were first welcomed to the country by Sayyid Saeed bin Sultan, a ruler of the current royal family, and have continued to settle in Oman. The northern parts of the country are exposed to the Indo-Iranian languages of Iran. Hence, Kumzari, an Indo-Iranian language, is intensively used there. In the southern parts, Omanis speak five Modern South Arabian languages (Jibbāli, Mehri, Bathari, Hobyot, and Ħarsusi).  Overall, Oman has more than ten distinct languages spoken across its territory—as situation that has had important consequences.3 For example, Shaaban (1977) observes that the linguistic interactions of Omanis with people who speak the minority languages and expatriates have left noticeable traces in Omani dialects. Omanis have borrowed many words into their dialects, further enriching the dialects. Al Mahrooqi and Denman state that since 1970, Oman has become “well-integrated into the international community and has a region-wide reputation for tolerance, peacefulness and middle-course policies” (2014:228). Therefore, it is not uncommon to find intermarriages between Omanis and minority people and foreigners, supporting the emergence of speech that is diverse in its phonology and morphology and utilizes different lexical terms (Shaaban 1977). In this study, Omani women are observed to use endearment terms that are originally non-Omani. [End Page 390]  Since the discovery of oil in the Arabian Gulf, Oman has undergone major societal changes that impacted the lifestyle, dialects, and education of Omanis (Al Mahrooqi and Denman 2014). To illustrate, basic infrastructure such as paved roads, education, healthcare, and growth of commerce through trade has pushed Omanis to abandon their village homes for big villas in the capital. The spread of schools has also shifted Omanis from Qur’anic schools to modern education. Since diversity mostly exists in the capital, Omanis coming from the interior of the country have found themselves developing dialects distinct from those spoken in their villages. This has inevitably led to a loss of culture and heritage. As rightly pointed out by Al Mahrooqi and Denman (2014), there are two noticeable changes due to modernity: the local dialects of Oman have experienced recession, and new words have crept into the speech of the younger generation.  The following section addresses the main functions of endearment terms as discussed in the literature, showing how they range from intimacy to constructing identity.3. Main functions of endearment termsBesides intimacy, terms of endearment may also serve as informative clues that indicate the linguistic norms and practices of a society. For example, Pauletto, Aronsson, and Galeano (2017) show that Italian parents exuberantly use endearment terms, nicknames, and diminutives in directives and request sequences to set exemplary manners of conduct at dinner tables. In Afful, terms of endearment used by college students feature nicknames, solidarity and endearment terms, and initials or alphabetism, and serve to “reflect individual and social identities based on values, norms and beliefs valued either by the students, the academic setting or the larger society” (2006:89). Motley and Craig-Henderson explore one term of endearment in relation to ethnicity, questioning its legitimacy as a term of endearment or empowerment when publicly uttered (2010:949). To illustrate, they note that the term nigger, perceived as offensive to many African Americans, loses its offensive effect when perceived by Afro-Caribbeans because of differences in their historical and cultural experiences. Kilani-Schoch and Xanthos (2013) argue that petit in French is used as an expression of endearment in noun phrases by small children who are starting to acquire French. It may also serve as a mitigating device, proving that children acquire pragmatic competence before they learn the semantic nuances of the language.  Similarly, terms of endearment may maintain stereotypical views about traditional gender roles as they could project females as the gentler, kindhearted, childlike, and nurturing sex (Eagly and Wood 1982). Boasso, Covert, and Ruscher (2012) examine perceptions of women who are recipients or users of terms of endearment. They argue that terms of endearment convey gender prejudice or “benevolent sexism,” which is defined as “a subjectively favorable, chivalrous ideology that offers protection and affection to women who embrace [End Page 391] conventional roles” (Glick and Fiske 2001:109). Sadiqi (1995), writing about Moroccan women, argues that public recognition is often a property only of men and that a woman’s role is to want success for her husband. Therefore, women tend to be less assertive than men and their language is marked with polite forms and euphemisms. In a study on complimenting and the use of compliments, Holmes states: “Women, because of their role in the social order, are seen as appropriate recipients of all manners of social judgments in the form of compliments. . . . The way a woman is spoken to is, no matter what her status, a subtle and powerful way of perpetuating her subordinate role in society” (1993: 108).  Brown and Draper (2003), in their examination of the ineffective patronizing patterns of speech used to address the elderly in nursing homes, provide support for the claim that terms of endearment can be viewed by the addressed as an offensive, demoralizing, and condescending form of language. They show that language that involves “diminutive modifications of the [patients’] names, as well as terms of endearment (such as “honey” or “sweetheart”)” (2003:18) is often viewed as childlike, abrupt, disrespectful, and disinterested or ignoring the older person. In a different context, the Nursing and Midwifery Council in the United Kingdom bans nurses who care for older patients from using endearment terms such as love and dearie. This is to reinforce the importance, in the nursing care, of speaking to older people respectfully, as terms of endearment have been shown to hurt patients’s feelings.  A study by Afful (2010) reveals the changing nature of terms of endearment. It shows that terms of address in Akan may change in the course of a person’s life. Hence, the birth name, when used, serves as a hypocoristic term of endearment. Therefore, birth names like Kofi and Abenaa are shortened into Koo or kee and Abii to serve as affectionate terms of address.  In light of this sketch of the main functions of endearment terms based on the available studies to date, the next sections lay out the theoretical framework and questions of the present article.4. Theoretical frameworkThe theoretical framework upon which this study is based assumes the importance of the anthropological aspect of language for understanding the linguistic norms of a society. Foley states that anthropological linguistics “seeks to uncover the meaning behind the use, misuse or non-use of language, its different forms, registers and styles. It is an interpretive discipline peeling away at language to find cultural understandings” (1997:3). How and when endearment terms are used in place of real names is a sign indicative of the linguistic norms of a particular culture or society. It allows us to identify interactional norms and levels of intimacy. Terms of endearment are used to address a close recipient with whom the addresser has an intimate relationship. Although they generally convey intimacy and express favorable attitudes towards the recipient, they encompass a diverse array of semantics which are [End Page 392] indicative of social, cultural, and interactional norms, and may also indicate gender differentiation. Moreover, the use of endearment terms also uncovers gender differentiation when they are observed to be more used by women than men for this study. (Although our study included only female participants, they reported on terms that they heard used by males.) Tannen (1984, 1986) argues that power is linked to nonreciprocal forms of address whereby a speaker addresses another by title and last name but is addressed by first name, while solidarity is associated with reciprocal terms of address where both interlocutors address each other by first name or by title and last name. Tannen states “power governs asymmetrical relationships where one is subordinate to another, solidarity governs symmetrical relationships characterized by social equality and similarity” (1994:167).5. Study questions and data collectionThe study seeks to answer three main questions: 		• What are the most common terms of endearment used by females in Oman to address their male and female recipients?  		• How are these terms structurally formed (i.e., are they single words, phrases, compounds, sentences, etc.)?  		• What are the semantics they invoke, and do those semantics indicate any cultural and interactional norms such as intimacy, inferiority, cultural reference, etc.?   In order to address these questions, twenty-five female Omani students majoring in English language and literature, who were taking a course in language and society in the fall of 2013, were asked to note down terms of endearment wherever they heard them or used them at the university or at home and the social contexts in which they occurred. The collected data comprise 122 terms of endearment and fifty social contexts. We (al Aghbari and al Mahrooqi) transcribed these terms of endearment, translated them into English, and categorized them according to their semantics, as listed in the appendix. We also counted their frequency, as there were quite a few terms that recurred in the same social context and were used by all the students. Since gender-specific terms of endearment can easily be identified due to salient language markers (e.g., suffixes as in ʔaziz=i4 → addressed to male and ʔaziz–t=i → female), we classified the terms into terms used to address males, terms used to address females, and terms used to address both males and females (see appendix). The data collected were analyzed against existing literature on terms of endearment. They were classified in relation to a number of recurring themes. This enables in-depth linguistic analyses of Omani terms of endearment.  The rest of the article is structured as follows: in section 6, we present the data and discuss their implications; section 6.1 discusses gender differentiation in the use of terms of endearment, and section 6.2 discusses the semantics in relation to the available literature. Section 7 offers concluding remarks. [End Page 393]6. Data analysis and discussion6.1. Gender differentiationThe collected terms of endearments show variation in the number of forms used to address females, males, and both genders. A few examples are listed in (1)–(3).(1) TERMS USED TO ADDRESS MALES  aʃ=ʃe:χ‘the sheikh’al= ʔasad‘the lion’aṭ = ṭajb‘the kind’(2) TERMS USED TO ADDRESS FEMALES  ta:g ra:s=i‘the crown of my head’ja laba galb=ik‘I sacrifice myself to your heart’ṭuwa:jf=i‘my family; relatives’(3) TERMS USED TO ADDRESS BOTH GENDERS  ʔabojj =i‘my father’ʔum =i‘my mother’aʃ=ʃa:jib‘the old’Out of the 122 collected terms of address, seventy-five (61 percent) of the recurrent terms of endearment are used by females to females and forty-seven (39 percent) to males, as shown in the appendix. Closely studying those terms, we observe that there are only twelve (10 percent) terms of endearment used by males to address their male interlocutors, as shown in table 1.Click for larger viewView full resolutionTable 1.Number of Terms across Same and Opposite Genders    The endearment terms collected show that there are more than 116 (95 percent) terms used to address females than males in the data set. This reflects the ease and openness with which Omani women converse with one another. As shown in the appendix, terms meaning ‘love’, ‘sweetheart’, ‘life’, ‘I love you’, and ‘I sacrifice my heart to you’ surface quite often between female inter-locutors. Moreover, there is more variety in the terms of endearment used to address female recipients. These terms also reveal less serious language and a tendency to be soft and caring. Many studies of gender and language relate female’s language to the power given to them in a society. As women in Omani society are expected to stay home, care for children and family, and do household chores, one can assume that their language reflects that role. Sadiqi, describing [End Page 394] Moroccan women, says, “Socially, Moroccan women are relegated to the second position in key areas like the family, public circles, and law courts” (1995:73). She also states that public recognition is often a property only of men and that a woman’s role is to want success for her husband. Women tend to be less assertive than men and their language is marked with polite forms and euphemisms.  In what follows, we report the social contexts in which Omani females use terms of endearment. These suggest that females view themselves as subordinate and weak; they also reveal how women need men to carry out tasks for them. In excerpt 1 below, from a recorded conversation, Muna asks her brother Ali to take her car for its routine service. When he returns with the car after it has been serviced, she addresses him as χali:f–at ʔabojji ‘my father’s successor’.Excerpt 1  The above conversation reveals Muna’s appreciation for her brother’s help. As taking the car for its periodic service is usually done by men in Oman, Muna acknowledges that her brother has done his job of supporting her and has saved her the trouble of taking the car herself to be serviced. This conversation also shows the strong attachment between sisters and brothers in the Omani society.  In a different context, shown in excerpt 2, Muna addresses her brother as baṭal ‘brave man’ and ʔinta rigga:l ‘you are a real man’, after he protected her from a man who kept harassing her by constantly calling her.Excerpt 2  After Ali called the man’s number, scolded him, and told him never to call his sister’s number again, Muna said ʔin=ta rigga:l, ya bat.al ‘You are my brave man’.  The context in excerpt 2 above confirms how Omani women constantly use endearment terms to seek protection by their males. Does it show that they seek [End Page 395] their protection, or that they depend on their protection? Muna, though able to stop the man who kept bothering her, decided to seek the help of her brother. After he did so, she addressed him with two terms of endearment to strengthen her bonds with him and to reaffirm her need for his help. Such terms oblige Ali to assume his role as a protector and supporter of his sister, Muna.  In another situation, Muna and Maryam are close friends. They always study for tests together. They also share class notes and work on their homework together. Muna has been sick for a week now and was not able to attend her lectures. Maryam therefore comes to Muna’s house to explain the lectures to her. She also helps her with her homework assignments. After Muna recovers, she brings Maryam a small gift and writes on a card the sentence in (1).(1)  Omani women do not place themselves on equal footing with their male partners because they usually address each other and their male interlocutors with terms of endearment, the semantics of those terms of endearment reveal inferiority, need, and subordination, and Omani men are never reported to address women with endearment terms of equivalent semantics. For example, women often call their brothers χali:f–at ʔabojji, literally, ‘the successor of my father’, which displays their continued need for a male provider and supporter. From birth, young Omani girls perceive their fathers as protectors and commodity providers. They constantly respect them and are fearful of bringing shame to their father’s name. When the father passes away, his protective role is automatically assumed by the brother, who becomes responsible for the continued protection of his sisters. Convinced of the positivity of the dominant role assumed by males in the family, Omani women regard men highly. Not only do they seek the protection of, and provision by, a male counterpart, they also coin endearment terms which, whether consciously or unconsciously, reflect their need for males throughout all stages of their life.  Overall, the present study also demonstrates that people’s choice of language reflects their interactional practices, intimacy, and linguistic creativity. Furthermore, the study reveals how language can be viewed as a powerful tool that reflects inferiority and subordination. It shows that Omani women use various endearment terms to address their male and female interlocutors to project their need for their female friends’ support and their men’s provision and protection.6.2. Semantic domains of terms of endearment6.2.1 Male addresseesAccording to Schneider and Homans, “Terms of endearment fall into a series of classes: saccharine terms (honey, sugar, sweet, [End Page 396] cookie, etc.), affection terms (love, beloved, lover, etc.), animal and vegetable terms (kitten, bear-cat, pumpkin, etc.), and a large and varied collection of miscellaneous and idiosyncratic terms, some of which are nonsense syllables (baby, pookums, etc.)” (1955:1202). Omani terms of endearment display similarities with the latter classes, but they also exploit other semantics. However, Omani terms of endearment used to address males employ fewer semantic categories than those used to address females.  For this article, we classified terms of endearment used to address males into three semantic categories. The majority (i.e., five terms of endearment) relate to positive or favorable attributes of males, such as masculinity or power (ʔl–ʔasad ‘lion’), courage (baṭal ‘courageous’), generosity (naʃmi ‘generous; giving’), and superiority (aʃʃe:χ and ʃe:χi, lit., ‘my sheikh’). Agyekum argues that similar terms of endearment “depict that there is an inherent element in the name that corresponds with the bearer’s mental and social behavior” (2006: 208). We also argue that these endearment terms correspond with the addresser’s perceptions of the addressee—how the addresser views the recipient. To illustrate, the speaker views the addressee as a responsible individual on whom one can depend when in need. Evidence comes from the fact that aʃʃe:χ, ʃe:χi, and naʃmi are terms used by females to address males. This confirms females’ reliance on men for protection and support, while males never address each other with endearment terms that show need for their male recipients. As Wolfson and Manes (1979) rightly argue, women are addressed with terms of endearment in situations when men are not; however, men generally are not addressed with terms of endearment when women are not.  The second, less common semantic category is that of physical features, such as alʁa:wi ‘beauty’ and alqamar ‘the moon’. The latter is an icon of beauty in Arabic poetry and may also be used to address a woman. These are less common, as men in the Arab world are exalted for their courage and not for their physical beauty. The conversations recorded relate to a wife addressing her elegant husband with alʁa:wi, after he dressed up for his brother’s engagement party.  The third category supports the belief that terms of endearment reveal inferiority of women and their need of male protection (see table A1). A fairly frequently used term of endearment by women when addressing men is χali:f–at ʔabojji, which literally means ‘my father’s successor’. This term expresses weakness and requests support from the male recipient. This term of endearment bears a cultural reference. Another frequent term is ra:ʕi beiti ‘the owner of my house’. These reveal how women in Oman regard their male partners, brothers, and relatives. The male is the pillar of the Omani family; he is the sole provider of food and belongings. No matter how high the position or rank of a female partner is, her reliance on the male is insurmountable. Moreover, as confirmed by Agyekum, “the names are meant to shape the children’s upbringing, behavior, and socialization” (2006:209). One of the socialization techniques in Oman is to instill manliness in males by addressing them with [End Page 397] endearment terms that prepare them for their future roles as protectors and providers.  Other terms of endearment that surface quite often are affectionate and intimate in nature. Those include maħbu:bi, ħabibi, ru:ħi, and ʕazizi. Despite the fact that those terms do not introduce any feelings of inferiority or subordination, they indicate a female’s true and unfailing love for the male addressee. To illustrate, maḥbu:bi means literally ‘my sole lover’, and gives the impression that the woman will never be unfaithful. The terms of endearment addressed to males, though neutral in their surface meaning, may allude to inferiority. Furthermore, they originate from the Omani dialect; words like ð̣na:j=i or mað̣nu:n(i) ‘my offspring’, ħba:b=i ‘my boss’, ʁana:jj=i ‘my richness’, ṭaħna:n=i ‘unknown’, and ʔl=ʕadajim ‘the rare’ are typically Omani. These come from the local dialect and are used by the elderly to express intimacy, affection, and sincere love. According to Agyekum, Akan names can be “understood and interpreted under context” (2006:210). Similarly, the younger generations of Omani females may be carrying memories about the early context when they first heard these old terms of endearment used by their grandparents. Afful and Natery argue that Ghanaian college students construct their own social worlds utilizing endearment terms. They state that “they (the social worlds) are also made and remade by these verbal behaviors in the course of the process, thus evidencing a sort of dialectal emphasis upon both the contingency and the creativity of humans” (2013:93; emphasis added). It is intriguing how these old terms of endearment resurface among younger generations. Apparently, the younger generations miss the true love and pure affection experienced by the older generations.6.2.2. Female and male addresseesThe terms of endearment addressed to females and males are richer in their semantic domains. They are categorized into six main semantic domains (see tables A2 and A3). The majority fall under the category of body parts, which may be a single word or compound. Single-word body parts encompass ʃaħm=i ‘fat’, ʕru:q=i ‘my veins’, ʕju:n=i or ʕjuna:–t=i ‘my eyes’, fuwa:d=i ‘brain’, nabð̣=i ‘my heartbeats, mṣa:rin=i ‘my abdomen’, and qalb=i ‘my heart’. Compound body parts include ʃaħm–at kubd=i ‘my liver’s fat’, ta:g ra:s=i ‘my head crown’, nu:r ʕe:n=i ‘my eyes’ light’, ħʃa:ʃ–at gu:f=i ‘my inner body’, and many more. Females are observed to make full use of inner body parts to address their male and female interlocutors, implying that their inter-locutors are as precious as those body parts.  The second common type of endearment terms indicates kinship relations, such as binti ‘my daughter’, alwa:lid or ba:h or ʔabujji or baba ‘my father’, ma:h, mama, or ʔummi ‘my mother’, alħa:gijj–ah or alʕagu:z ‘the elderly’. Although the speaker is not related by blood to the addressee, those terms indicate respect and humility towards the addressee, who is likely to be older than the speaker. Old-fashioned terms of endearment also surface in female-female interactions. We found words such as ħajj=i ‘my life; my love’, ħba:b–t=i [End Page 398] ‘my love’, and ṭwa:jf=i ‘my relatives’ in the collected data, revealing a tendency to value the old culture and its associated language.  Terms of address that express attractive and favorable attributes to female addressees are very common. Unlike those used to address males, terms of endearment for female addressees tend to refer to physical beauty. Terms like al=mazju:n ‘the pretty’, al=ħilw–ah ‘the pretty’, sukar ‘sugar’, dalaʕ ‘spoiled’, and ʁizajil ‘gazelle’ express attractive beauty, by which the addressee can be expected to feel flattered. Needless to say, those terms of endearment increase intimacy and cement relations. The term ʁizajil is the diminutive of ‘gazelle’, an animal famous for its beautiful wide eyes. This exemplifies Duranti’s important point that “words carry with them a power that transcends beyond mere identification and tagging of people, objects and properties” (1997:19). Unless the female speaker feels the beauty of the addressee, she is not obliged to call her female friend by an endearment term that reflects her beauty and attractiveness.  The largest number of endearment terms addressed to females fall within the category of intimacy and closeness. This group of words includes ḥub=i ‘my love’, ħabi:b–t=i ‘my love’, ħajat=i ‘my life’, ʕumr=i ‘my life’, ruħ=i ‘my soul’, ʁala:t=i ‘my precious being’, and ʕaziz–t=i ‘my dear’. It is worth noting that these also have linguistic variants, such as compounds and phrases beginning with a vocative particle ja (e.g., ja baʕd ʕumri ‘You mean more to me than my life! (lit., ‘oh! after my life’). This reveals inventiveness and creativity on the part of the speaker, who strives to come up with linguistically rich terms of endearment to impress the addressee and solidify the relationship with her. Afful and Natery observed a similar tendency among Ghanaian college students, who develop linguistic resources that set them apart from other members of the university community such as faculty and supporting staff. They state that “students are likely to deploy diverse endearment terms among themselves by drawing on existing linguistic rules within their community of practice, their imagination and personal linguistic repertoire in different interactive or dyadic encounters” (2013:93).  Exposure to the media has also enriched the terms of endearment in Omani Arabic. We found a number of terms borrowed from other Gulf countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the Emirates. Among the foreign terms of endearment are ja laba ‘Oh, my love!’ (lit., ‘oh! my heart)’, wa fade:t=ik ‘I would give my own life for you.’ (lit., ‘and I sacrifice my life for you’, and baʕdha anna:s kulhum ‘You are more important to me than other people.’ (lit., ‘oh! after all these people’). Holes (1989) discusses the social and geographical differentiation of a number of phonological and morphological tendencies characterizing the speech of Omani Arabic. He also demonstrates the relationship between Omani and Gulf Arabic, and the influence of the latter on the former. To illustrate, phonetically, q in Omani Arabic tends to be lost in the speech of the educated and young generations. Moreover, many Gulf words have begun to find their [End Page 399] way into the dialects of Omani Arabic, including the above mentioned terms of endearment.7. Concluding remarksAbove, it is shown that Omani women use endearment terms to express solidarity and affection. Gender-based differentiation is found, whereby Omani women often use terms of endearment that suggest women’s inferiority, subordination, and weakness. This stems from the Omani culture, which places men in a higher social status than women. Since women are raised to appreciate men’s roles as protector and providers, they have full regard for men and continue to attribute these roles to them. In accord with this upbringing, Omani women address their close male interlocutors by terms of endearment indicating their own weakness and need to seek support. Generally speaking, terms of endearment reflect warmth and intimacy but may indicate that the “addressees are in need of protection by making reference to their vulnerability” (Boasso, Covert, and Ruscher 2012:543). In addition, Omani women use more endearment terms than Omani men. This is evidenced by the fact that the majority of the collected terms of endearment are used by and addressed to female interlocutors.