Postracial Policing, “Mother Tongue”Sourcing, and Images of Singlish StandardAbstractAfter decades of denigration and targeting by the state, Singlish—or Singaporean Colloquial English—has come into its own as a “uniquely Singaporean” phenomenon (Wee 2018), both a source and site of projects of raciolinguistic value-creation (Rosa and Flores 2017). Today, Singlish is often presented as emblematic of broader “racial harmony” among Singapore’s four official races, yet it has also become an arena for articulating and rejecting critiques of racialized Chinese-Singaporean majoritarian privilege. This paper analyzes interviews with literary producers, public presentations by artists, and published mediatized texts in which Singlish comes into being as a site of ideological contestation. It describes two contrastive figures and the discourse registers through which they are materialized: first, postracial policing, voiced as an insistence that Singlish is sui generis, and second, “Mother Tongue” sourcing, voiced as an insistence on adherence, in spelling and pronunciation, to the racialized “Mother Tongue” varieties (and their racialized speakers) from which Singlish items are sourced. I argue that these two figures and enregistered positions co-participate in the production of an image of standard: a felt sense of standard-likeness that emerges as an effect of aesthetic textuality (Nakassis 2019), even in the absence of overt standardization projects.In late 2019, I sat down for an interview with Gwee, a prominent public defender of Singlish. The lexical label “Singlish”—a portmanteau of “Singapore(an)” and “English”—indexes a shifty category (Fong, Lim, and Wee 2002), sometimes used for Singaporean Englishes broadly, other times for a particular basilectal variety in a Singaporean lectal continuum (Deterding 2007; Leimgruber 2012; M.-L. Ho and Platt 1993; Saraceni 2015; Wee 2018). The conversation that day covered a wide range of chronologically nonlinear ground, from details of Gwee’s linguistic biography as a Hokkien-Chinese Singaporean, to a Yahoo! TV web series he stars in, to his recent translation of Saint-Exupéry’s 1943 classic The Little Prince into Singlish, to a 2016 incident that catapulted him into Singapore’s public-intellectual limelight, after an op-ed he published in defense of Singlish in the New York Times invited a published rebuttal by none other than the Singapore Prime Minister’s Press Secretary.Much of the early conversation focused on historical shifts in Singlish’s composition and sociolinguistic variation. It was relatively early in my fieldwork research, and I was still learning how to ask questions that did not reproduce hegemonic scripts (Carr 2009; 2010; 2011) about which other scholars have written extensively: scripts about Singlish as an existential threat to “Good English,” hence to Singapore’s economic competitiveness and geopolitical survival; scripts about Singlish as the most—even the only—“uniquely Singaporean” phenomenon, thus as worthy of celebration and commoditization (for an extended discussion of these scripts, see Wee 2018, Chapters 2 and 5). At this point, midway through the interview, I asked about a comment I had heard Gwee make during a public event a couple months prior, in which he speculated that Singlish seemed nowadays to be facing pressure toward standardization.Suddenly sitting forward in the chair, Gwee’s comportment became more agitated, his verbal pacing and prosodic range more exaggerated than before:The thing to remember about Singlish is that the words that came from Malay into Singlish came in pre-standardization. Back then, the Malay spelling was much more fluid. People were very tolerant about saying things different ways. It used to be that o and u were interchangeable. People used both, but it was no problem! Now, people don’t understand how things have changed in Malay. Now they say, “Oh, Chinese people are distorting the Malay language!”I followed up as soon as I had the opportunity: “May I ask, who is it who says that Chinese people are distorting the Malay language?”You’ll hear this a lot. People are always saying, “Don’t misspell it”—especially about Malay words. The next stage in the battle is spelling. The thing is that, for most of the time Singlish was spoken, it was just oral. So, it didn’t matter, you just used the words. Now people are becoming more aware of the variety, they’re debating it more and more. But you don’t have to politicize it and make it about race like that.The emphasized “you” of the final sentence did not refer to me as the present addressee of the utterance, needless to say, but rather to a figure of personhood, a socially salient, differentiable kind of speaker-actor (Agha 2005; 2007): the critic who critiques a racially hegemonic other (Rosa and Flores 2017, 622) for acts of “distorting” the Malay language (and other minoritized codes) through misspelling, mispronunciation, or both.A few weeks later, I was sitting with a Singaporean Indian friend at an open-air kopitiam ‘coffee shop’ in the east of Singapore, where we were passing the time before attending a performance. As we sat, a middle-aged Chinese Singaporean man approached the South Asian proprietor at a stall selling beverages and began loudly ordering. The increased volume and close proximity drew the attention of me and my friend, as well as several other bystanders; the conversation did not seem to be going smoothly, as the proprietor leaned in, brow furrowed, while the man doing the ordering continued to repeat himself. My friend rolled their eyes and directed their gaze toward me, lowering their voice: “Chinese people, right? They cannot pronounce Malay words properly! They like to pronounce like the words are Chinese but it’s just wrong.” I had been unable to overhear the content of the conversation, so I asked for clarification on what was being mispronounced. The response moved beyond the immediate interaction: “It’s every language that’s not Chinese, they just anyhow spell like they don’t care at all that we spell it our way.” (“Anyhow” in this usage can be glossed as ‘carelessly’ or ‘in a haphazard manner’). This assertion was followed by several reported examples before the conversation moved on.Over the 12?months following this interview and conversation, I repeatedly encountered this figure: the critic who draws attention to both Singlish “errors,” and to the structural conditions that make those errors possible. I routinely encountered the earlier contrastive figure as well: the counter-critic, who—as voiced by Gwee—rejects the critic’s attempts to “politicize” Singlish and make “mere” facts of orthographic and phonetic variation “about race.” This article tracks the materialization of these two figures—the critic and the counter-critic—through a conjoined set of discourse registers. For individuals performing the figure of the counter-critic, sources were reframed as superfluous: what mattered was not how a word was used in the racialized “Mother Tongues” from which it was drawn, but how it came to habitually be used by “Singaporeans.” Performances of the critic, meanwhile, drew attention to token instances, or patterns of use, in which “Chinese Singaporeans” “got it wrong”—and worse, defended their errors as actually correct vis-à-vis a generic figure of “the Singaporean.” I refer to the two contrastive positions respectively as postracial policing—a strategy that indexes “the Singaporean” as the persona whose speech ought to be taken as the reference-point for “correct” Singlish—and “Mother Tongue” sourcing—a strategy that insists on fidelity to patterns-of-use embodied by (racialized) speakers of (racialized) “Mother Tongue” languages.In this article, I argue that, despite attempts to recruit Singlish to divergent ideological projects, these divergent projects co-participate in the construction of what I call an image of standard. As I develop it here, the image of standard should be understood as a result of what Constantine Nakassis (2019) calls aesthetic textuality: a “principle for construing the sensuousness of semiosis” via “emergent structures of qualia[, materialized abstract qualities,] that co-textualize each other to form [both] diagrammatic-iconic textures in events of semiosis—and image texts” (70, emphasis removed; on qualia, see also L. Chumley 2017; L. H. Chumley and Harkness 2013). Aesthetic textuality, in other words, is a way of understanding how feeling itself is structured in and as text. In the present case, feeling is structured by a pooled ideological resource across divergent positions (Wee 2018, 5): that there is one, correct way to do Singlish. However, notwithstanding the analogy to standardization raised by Gwee in the opening vignette, Singlish today remains a nonstandardized variety, nor is Singlish being standardized. And yet, as I seek to show here, the co-textualization of speech sounds, signs in a visual-orthographic channel, and attributed facts of ethnoracial embodiment construct a feeling that some fashions of speaking and writing Singlish are not just wrong, but deviations from a standard-like norm. Images of standard can thus be understood as a precipitate of a metaculture of standardization, a culture for the interpretation of culture that “aids culture in its movement through space and time [and] gives a boost to the culture that it is about, helping to propel it on its journey” (Urban 2001, 4).Critical scholars of language have powerfully demonstrated how standardizing projects—with standards as both those projects’ impetuses and precipitates—come to be mobilized in further projects aimed at ranking and stigmatizing not just speech, but also speakers (Rosa and Flores 2017, 622). Whether these projects target individuals or groups, scholars have shown how standardizing projects thus articulate with other oppressive systems and reinforce white supremacy and anti-Blackness (Smalls, Spears, and Rosa 2021; Smalls 2021); sexism, misogyny, and cisheteropatriarchy (Alim, Lee and Carris 2020; Morgan 2020); anti-Indigenous sentiments and settler supremacy (Kroskrity and Paul V. 2021; Leonard 2021), and so on. In this article, I build on this work by examining how the presence of standards in a stratified raciolinguistic milieu come to exert a hegemonic, regimenting influence that extends far beyond overt standardizing projects as such, and even regiments the evaluation nonstandardized codes as if standards did, in fact, exist.I elaborate this case to suggest a novel area of attention for linguistic anthropologists and other critical scholars of language, who are well positioned to shed light on the ways that perceptions of raciolinguistic difference (Rosa and Flores 2017, 627 ff) get regimented via images of standard-likeness to produce judgments of “correct” versus “incorrect” speech. In the ethnographic situation that I focus on here, evaluators of Singlish draw on generic images of standard to multiply project and construe other situated, metaphorical, three-dimensional topologies of raciolinguistic social space as if they were organized by authorized standardizing institutions, institutional gatekeepers, and linguistic varieties to which members of a broader standardized language community pledged their allegiance (Silverstein 2017, 137 ff). In so doing, evaluators of Singlish animate a pair of contrastive figures—the critic and the counter-critic—so as to orient, at a first order, toward divergent standard-like models of “correct” language use; meanwhile, at higher indexical orders, the same evaluators unwittingly collaborate to uphold images of standard as such by engaging in the work of attending to or disavowing Chinese-Singaporean racialized majoritarian privilege.My aims in this article are threefold: first, I aim to contribute to the well-trodden conceptual and theoretical ground that is standardization. As stated above, images of standard are distinct from standardizing projects and their various institutionalizations—from the contextual, historically and socio-culturally specific ways in which one learns to acquiesce to policing by standardizing institutions, or to subordinate others via performances of linguistic gatekeeping (Rosa 2016; 2019; Silverstein 2010). I suggest that attending to image—to aesthetic textuality—as it is made in circulation (Gal 2018) sheds new light on standardization processes and projects. Second, I aim to explicate how a concern for “correct” Singlish—animating, and animated by, images of standard—serves as a resource in situated acts of comparison among linguistic performances, kinds of speakers, and addressees/overhearers. In doing so, interactants engage in acts of comparison to signal their value-laden orientations, or footings (Agha 2005), toward other large-scale axes of differentiation taken up in encounters beyond the Singlish debate per se. I introduce these axes—local–global divides, on the one hand, and racialized majority–minority divides, on the other—in Sections 2–4. Finally, I attend to what the poet, critic, and cultural theorist Fred Moten (2008) has called comparative racialization. Moten’s comparative racialization dovetails with what Rosa and Flores (2017) call a raciolinguistic perspective: one that “interrogates the historical and contemporary co-naturalization of language and race” (Rosa and Flores 2017, 622). Though the invocation of “race” in the context of a Southeast Asian global city may seem inappropriate, as I will discuss in Section 2, race is incessantly—and explicitly—talked about (using the etymologically English lexical label) in Singapore, and implicitly structures action in a range of encounters and institutional sites. Yet more than this, extending Moten, Rosa, and Flores, I seek to build through this analysis toward what Roseann Liu and Savannah Shange have called “thick solidarity” (2018): toward global coalitions (Reagon 1983) grounded in partial connections (Strathern 2004) across irreducibly particular experiences of racialized violence, rather than their homogenization by presuming the categories provided by a colonial-imperial-modern nation-state formation (Mignolo 2011).The remainder of the article proceeds as follows: the first section revisits a select literature on standardization and its authorizing images (Silverstein 2003b; 2017). The second offers background on Singapore’s raciolinguistic situation. Third, I analyze enregistered performances of postracial policing in public literary events, interviews, and online commentary. Fourth, I introduce “Mother Tongue” sourcing as it appears in literary events and interviews. I conclude with images of standard beyond elite arenas, examining a case of spontaneous interaction in which these two competing figures were taken up to enact non-public gatekeeping.Aesthetic Textuality and Conic Images of StandardMuch has been written about standardization—its ideologies, institutions, and contextual manifestations, past and present. This section does not aim for comprehensive or even detailed coverage of this literature (for critical overviews, see, e.g., Johnstone 2016; Heller and McElhinny 2017, 102–8 ff, 196 ff). Rather, I focus on a body of work with special salience for the argument I develop here: specifically, I focus on Michael Silverstein’s work on language ideologies of standardization (Silverstein 1996; 2003b; 2017), which traces out the multidimensional regimentation of language-use and stigmatization of speakers of nonstandard varieties under conditions of overt standardization. In this work, Silverstein traces out the contours of the “cone of standardization,” a globalizing cultural model comprising a “multi-dimensional radial topology of variation of verbal behaviors in the language community, in which any noticeable deviation from standard points to…some identifiable ascribed social characteristics of speakers, of their addressees, or, in short, of anything characterizing the situation in which forms of the non-standard occur” (Silverstein 2017, 136). The invocation of a cone indexes the fact that participants in interaction metaphorically project and construe a three-dimensional social and cultural space through which speakers move, and in which they are located by others; this model narrows near its point, as the lateral space of acceptable variation gets smaller the nearer to the imagined standard one moves, at the same time that one moves further, vertically, from varieties ideologically located as “lower” on the cone.As Silverstein has argued, the regimes of language standardization through which this conic model is variously materialized are linked, historically and structurally, to a “culture of monoglot standardization” (Silverstein 1996), a culture that grounds Enlightenment assumptions about modern Euro-American nation-states as founded on primordially monoglot cultural–political entities (Bauman and Briggs 2003; Bonfiglio 2010; Silverstein 2010). Subsequent elaborations of the conic model have outlined the multiple potential stigmatizations a speaker faces under such regimes: speaking a “vernacular” language or failing to speak a “national language” altogether can call one’s citizenship into question (Blommaert 2009) or limit participation in “national” markets (Heller and McElhinny 2017, 94–102 ff). This also intersects with broader group-based judgments, as “assessments of particular individuals’ language use often invoke…ideas about the (in)competence and (il)legitimacy of entire racialized groups” (Rosa 2016, 163–64).Of course, these dynamics are slippery and ever-shifting (ibid, 166). Even in regimes—like the E.U. or Singapore—that valorize raciolinguistic “diversity,” cultures of monoglot standard still work to project a neutral top-and-center for each language, a bundle of “codified norms of correctness” (Gal 2006, 167) according to which racialized speakers’ (in)competence and (il)legitimacy is judged. As Heller and Rosa have argued in the context of francophone Canadian- and U.S.-based Spanish–English bilingual education, respectively, bilingualism is frequently imagined by policymakers, educators, and scholars as “double monolingualism,” with the ideal “bilingual speaker” as one who can refer to and predicate about any topic fully in two standardized denotational codes. Inability to do so deems one “incompetent” (Heller 2006, 83–110 ff), even languageless—“incapable of producing any legitimate language” (Rosa 2016, 163).Efforts at assessing individuals’ and groups’ speech in order to locate them topologically in raciolinguistic social space extends beyond linguistic evaluation as such. Scholars in (e.g. Bate 2009) and outside linguistic anthropology (e.g. Mazzarella 2003) have made productive use of the concept of aesthetics to evaluate how cultural categories come to be felt as well as reflected-on, hence coming to serve as resources in political projects of differentiation. In this respect, qualia—materialized tokens of abstract qualities (Chumley 2017)—act as culturally productive sites for anchoring categories, as well as these categories’ enregisterment as bodily perceptual dispositions (Bucholtz and Hall 2016; Gal 2013; Goodwin and Alim 2010; Jackson 2013). Such attention to aesthetics (as a function of poetics) has been central to emergent theorizations of image—“structure[s] of repetition/difference across iterated elements that constitute relations of mutual co(n)textualization” (Nakassis 2019, 70)—as an “immanent metapragmatics regimenting the entextualization of denotational or interactional coherence” (ibid) in the production of textuality more broadly (Silverstein 2004). In other words, aesthetic textuality foregrounds the ways that emergent text-structures are not just about denotation and interaction, but also about how structured assemblages of signs come to feel for their producers and evaluators (ibid; Nakassis 2019).I bring aesthetic textuality/image together with standardization to emphasize how the “cone of standardization” can be understood as an effect of both metapragmatic discourses and -functioning (Silverstein 1993) vis-à-vis standardizing ideologies. Under conditions of standardization, the conical model can thus be understood as a generic image of standard, one that is nevertheless only and always materialized contextually. Singapore’s language policy and -planning regimes in general—and education-policy regimes in particular—have featured numerous, historically disjunct standardization efforts. With the launch of the Speak Mandarin Campaign in 1979, the previous Taiwan-linked standard (??/?? Guóy? ‘Mandarin’) was replaced by Modern Standard Mandarin (??? P?t?nghuà, though this is referred to in Singapore as ?? Huáy? ‘Chinese language’) in education, newspapers, radio, and television; this was to suppress the use of “dialects,” thereby to eliminate Chinese intra-ethnic divisions (Bokhorst-Heng 1999). Sebutan baku ‘standard pronunciation’ was introduced to Malay instruction and mediatized industries in 1993, a constructed voice-from-nowhere to replace the previously widespread voice-from-somewhere: the Johor-Riau dialect (in 2007, however, a study noted that the Johor-Riau variety was still in widespread use; Sulor 2013, 7). Finally, “Standard Spoken Tamil” (SST) was introduced by the Ministry of Education as a supplement to “Literary Tamil” in 2005. A subdivision of the ‘L’ variety, SST is still a prescriptively monitored, standardized variety, though it is described as distinct from both the literary ‘H’ variety and “colloquial” elements in the ‘L’ variety; it is talked about by advocates as an ideal variety that students can (learn to) use “actively and spontaneously” in their “community” (Lakshmi 2012, 115). Though indexed to raciolinguistic nation-state territories elsewhere, each of these standardizing projects were still constructed endonormatively, as standards by Singaporeans, for the Singaporean context.I suggest that the aesthetics of standard-like-ness motivate embodied investments in particular registers—as well as the statuses those registers make available (Silverstein 2017, 246–47) beyond standardization as such. I suggest that sustained attention to the image of standard highlights the ways in which sensuous qualities get attributed to “correct” (versus incorrect) speech in processes aimed at making standard-backed prescriptive norms (Duane 2017; Romero 2012; Tupas and Rubdy 2015) detachable from their text-specific tokens, rendering them available to de- and recontextualization: to “circulation” as interdiscursivities (Briggs and Bauman 1992; Gal 2018; Silverstein and Urban 1996) or events of citation (Nakassis 2012; 2013; 2016). When evaluating Singlish, some instances of use come to feel correct, or not, as an effect of the structuring of qualities that felt to diagram a conic, standard-like model. Crucially, I track these processes through the forms of raciolinguistic group-ness that are emergent in and through interaction, even as they are imagined to precede any interaction.Singlish as Raciolinguistic-Ideological AssemblageAs reflexively modernist, co-naturalized constructs, language and race have been deeply intertwined in Singapore from the British colonial period onward. The British obsession with identifying racial “communities” was part of a strategy for governing colonial Singapore as a “plural society,” one in which individual “racial” communities qua “nations” (Furnivall 1956; Lee 2009; see also Kelly and Kaplan 2001) inhabited the same state, but did not “naturally” associate beyond the marketplace (Chua and Kwok 2001; Clammer 1998; Goh 2008). The legacies of the “plural society” are not just a matter of historical structures: they are also the focus of overt policy concern. As Singaporean social scientists and critical theorists have argued, several high-profile “race riots” in the 1960s and 2013 are to this day deployed and redeployed in public-sphere discourses—and codified in policy—as evidence that the various “races” have a stunted ability to organically live in “multicultural racial harmony” (Kathiravelu 2017).Official population demographics for the Southeast Asian island city-state of Singapore presently classify the population according to a standardized raciolinguistic model known as “CMIO,” an acronym recognizing four “races”—Chinese (as of 2019, 76.01% of the citizen population), Malay (15.00%), Indian (7.47%), and Other (1.53%)—each of which is assigned an official “Mother Tongue”: Mandarin for Chinese Singaporeans, Malay (Bhasa Melayu) for Malay Singaporeans, and Tamil1 for Indian Singaporeans. From Singapore’s independence until the present, the group categorized as Chinese has maintained a demographic majority. This demographic majority status has been mobilized, politically, as an impetus for constructing Singapore as geopolitically and raciolinguistically embattled, a “‘Chinese’ nation in a ‘Malay Muslim’ [region]” (Chua 2017, 128). Despite being commonly framed as a mere statement of demographic fact, Chinese majority has driven racialized narratives of the city-state’s perpetual state of racialized threat (Rahim 2010, 60–62). Though perhaps appearing unrelated to this, the proportions of CMIO “races” in the 2019 census enumerations have remained constant since independence in 1965. This is not by accident: state immigration policy explicitly maintains these historic proportions, argued to be necessary for preserving racial harmony into the future (Chan and Siddique 2019, 41–44).2 “Race” in Singapore is constructed as at once deeply (co-)naturalized, and as a dangerous yet unavoidable terrain. In communication deemed public, state agents deal with acts of “making it about race” more swiftly and violently than instances of racialized interpersonal or institutionalized harm. At the same time as overtly racist acts are categorized euphemistically (e.g. as “racially charged,” “racially insensitive,” etc.), antiracism is commonly re-enregistered as racism by state listening subjects or those voicing their alignment with state subject positions (Pak forthcoming).The emphasis on ethnoracial personhood in state policy is coupled with anxieties over language, voiced through assertions that English is at once necessary for maintaining racial harmony among Singaporeans—serving as a “neutral medium” that does not privilege the “Mother Tongue” of any “race”—and a means of connecting to the global economy (Kramer-Dahl 2003; Wee 2015; 2018). At the same time, it is voiced as a threat to the “cultural roots” of the CMIO “races” (Tan 2017; see also Barr 2000). English is often positioned today as a mere byproduct of British colonialism, and Singlish as an inevitable outgrowth of multicultural–multiracialism, but scholars have noted that English-use was not widespread until after Singapore’s independence, during 1970s implementations of compulsory English-medium education (Y.-Y. Tan 2017, 95) and “Mother Tongue” acquisition-planning (ibid, 97–98). As state language policies took hold, Singlish grew throughout the 1990s as a focus of anxieties over what was framed by public commentators as an unanticipated excess of Singaporeans’ “English-knowing bilingualism” (Pakir 1991).These anxieties motivated the launch of the Speak Good English Movement (SGEM) in 1999. Now in its second decade, this sustained language-planning campaign was designed in its early years to eliminate Singlish,3 though later, only to reduce its domains of use (Kramer-Dahl 2003). In response to decades-long public debates over the need to speak “Good English” rather than Singlish (the latter equated to “bad-” or “broken English”), Singlish advocates have insisted that the two are not mutually exclusive. Particularly since 2015 (L. Lim 2015), the terms of the debate have undergone a sea change: public-sphere discourses today commonly position Singlish as “uniquely Singaporean,” a language of its own, emblematic of a “desired local identity” (Hiramoto 2019, 451) and an “authentic” medium for the state to communicate with “everyday Singaporeans” (often superficially; Khoo 2015). This is due in no small part to an insistence on the part of Singlish defenders that the important thing is to know the difference between Singlish and Standard English—to know when, with whom, and for what purposes to use one or the other. Singaporeans can have their Singlish and “code-switch,” too.I follow other scholars writing about self-consciously “hybrid” (Palmié 2013) registers of language in considering Singlish not as an “objective ‘thing’ to be studied for its exciting linguistic features [but rather] as a series of value judgments and citations that produce a ‘language’ in the sphere of public discourse” (Newell 2009, 179; see also Wee 2018, 20). At the same time, I acknowledge that my own use of singular nouns and pronouns for referring to an object and focus of projects of value-creation and -ascription is fundamentally in tension with this stance (Spitulnik 1998, 31). I have nevertheless chosen to continue using “Singlish” here to foreground the fact that this is a widespread convention used in Singapore. This thingy quality makes Singlish readily available for differential value-creation projects, including those that seek to recruit it to projects of postracial policing, as I discuss in the next section.Postracial Policing and Counter-Critiques of Racialized Majoritarian PrivilegeIn this section, I trace out the discursive contours and interactional deployments of postracial policing: an enregistered discourse strategy that takes Singlish as sui generis, indexing “the Singaporean” as the persona whose speech embodies image-texts of “correct” performance, rather than the members of raciolinguistic groups that are minoritized both demographically and representationally. I examine how individuals engage in the work of scaling sets of local–global divides, situating them as superordinate to other concerns by voicing the figure of the foreigner-who-gets-it-wrong as an ideological double to a figure that dominates debates over “Good English”: that of the foreigner-who-does-not-understand. While the foreigner-who-does-not-understand is voiced by SGEM spokespeople and those who claim that Singlish is a barrier to “global communication” (hence a threat to Singapore’s economic and geopolitical security), the foreigner-who-gets-it-wrong, meanwhile, affords “the Singaporean” an opportunity to occupy the role of linguistic gatekeeper instead of the linguistically gate-kept. This entails a higher-order indexical effect (Silverstein 2003a): whether implicating a dialogue by its conspicuous avoidance (Irvine 1996, 152), or by demanding that others focus on foreigners rather than “mak[ing] it about race,” individuals performing postracial policing also enact a counter-critique of racialized majoritarian privilege. This position is not “postracial” in the sense of being after or beyond race; instead, I have chosen this analytic label because of a commonly voiced insistence by performers of this register: that focusing on the foreigner-who-gets-it-wrong is not “making it about race.”This returns our attention to the fact that histories and institutionalizations of “race” in Singapore constitute a fraught, yet unavoidable terrain; it also constitutes a hierarchically ordered terrain. Critical discourses in Singapore, both academic and nonacademic, have long pointed to the hegemonic racialized status enjoyed by Chinese Singaporeans. In 2015, the activist Sangeetha Thanapal coined the term “Chinese Privilege” (A. Koh and Dierkes-Thrun 2015; Thanapal 2015), recirculating a Facebook post by well-known Singaporean playwright Alfian Sa’at, in which the playwright constructed an overt link between U.S. white privilege and racial privilege in Singapore. Though incidents of “everyday racism” (Velayutham 2009) were well-documented before—from a Chinese Singaporean elected official making jokes about Indians’ skin color in Parliament (ibid, 255) to noise complaints habitually filed against Malay outdoor weddings (Lai and Mathews 2016, 30–31) to “brownface” incidents in which Chinese Singaporeans darkened their skin and dressed in stereotypical Indian attire (Pak forthcoming)—Thanapal’s neologism inaugurated a growing interdiscursive chain of apology, critique, and counter-critique of the term and its referents (e.g. Goh and Chong 2020; Zainal and Abdullah 2019). Singapore’s system of racialized majoritarian privilege, of course, does not emanate from ethno-racial personhood, nor from demographic majority-status, but rather co-constitutes both as conditions of and justification for privilege. Majority and minority statuses are not self-evident, but point to the issue of who counts, within what “universe of enumeration,” why, and with what effects (Gal 2017, 224–225).In explicating situated deployments of postracial policing as a dual strategy for rescaling perceived local–global divides and enacting a counter-critique of racialized majoritarian privilege, I draw on ethnographic data gathered from artistic practitioners and literary events, together with online commentaries responding to mediatized texts. Though seemingly a rarified domain, literary practitioners—and the texts they circulate as publications, talks, performances, etc.—often catalyze debates that circulate widely in genres and registers of public communication in Singapore, particularly through mediatizing institutions and -reportage. Literary practitioners and figures are often overtly drawn into, or targeted in, public debates by activists or politicians. Literature specifically, and the arts generally, have long been taken as central to the construction of a Singaporean identity (S. Lim 1989; T. A. Koh 2010; Poon and Whitehead 2017); beyond written works, festivals and other events serve as important nodes for entextualizing issues reflexively framed as matters of public concern.The Singapore Writers Festival (SWF), a key site for my analysis in this article, first began in 1986 as part of the Singapore Arts Festival (Poon 2018, 127). An officially multilingual affair, the festival has historically been predominantly Anglophone (ibid; see also Tay 2010, 121). SWF is important to the Singapore state’s arts- and cultural policy (Ooi 2008; 2010), contributing to “strategic cultivation of [Singapore’s] identity as nation and global city” (Poon 2018, 128). Scores of literary figures—both Singaporean and international—are featured annually, with programing fitted to a rotating cycle of themes that highlight Singapore’s official languages.4 Though frequently presented as merely instrumental to state branding efforts—as so much “creative icing” on an “economically vibrant cake” (Ministry of Information and the Arts 2000, 47, cited in Poon 2018, 130)—others have pointed out that festivals like SWF, whatever their function in statecraft and branding, still serve as key sites for the ritual performance of a reflexively literary Singaporean public, as well as sites at which issues of broader social and cultural concern are articulated (Tay 2010, 124–130). In 2019, many of the sessions, for instance, dealt with issues of translation, and the boundaries of the category of “Sing Lit”—a portmanteau of “Singapore(an)” and “Literature,” the boundaries of which have been extensively debated (ought it to include all literature in Singapore, or just works by Singaporean citizens?).While many discussions of “race” are dealt with during festivals and arts events via a range of avoidance strategies—most often by referring to languages instead of “races” (e.g. “Mandarin,” not “Chinese[-Singaporeans]”), or using “communities” as a term of euphemistic reference—participants are aware that arts spaces are something of an exception. Members of artistic-literary publics often narrate their concerns in terms of literary realism—that Singlish is a sociolinguistic fact in Singapore, hence any realistic depiction ought to include it—or by pointing out that, since the first decade of the 2000s, the state has by and large come to treat artistic and literary practice as a relatively nonthreatening social arena, notable exceptions aside (Silvio 2018). As a well-known poet quipped at a 2019 SWF event, “when we write we can be very free, because the government thinks Singaporeans don’t read.” This was met with laughter.The primary ethnographic anchoring point for the discussion that follows is a series of four public lectures, titled “Words We Love.” In each of the lectures, a Singaporean writer selected a “Singlish word” to explore as they saw fit over the course of a 45-minute talk. These included “Words We Love: Dei” (an etymologically Tamil item); “Words We Love: Lepak” (etymologically Malay); “Words We Love: Bojio” (etymologically Hokkien ??? Fújiàn huà); and “Words We Love: Lah” (various etymologies). As advertised in the official series description, “[i]n this mini-lecture series, we examine four words and phrases Singaporeans love and the richness of meaning they offer us.” However, the label of “mini-lecture series” belied their entertainment value: though all drew on scholarship and other authoritative texts (e.g. a popular Singlish dictionary) to varying degrees, each of the four lecturers were also consummate performers, well-known for their ability to entertain and get laughs. I here deal with the lectures non-sequentially, beginning with the last out of four, in which I suggest an enregistered discourse strategy of postracial policing is apparent.In “Words We Love: Lah,” Gwee, with whom I opened this article, focused on a discourse particle (lah) that has been highly emblematic of Singlish since the 1970s. The majority of the lecture, approximately 25 out of 35?minutes (not including the 10-minute Q&A), was spent addressing Singlish “errors” and admonishing against a reliance on “origins.” As for who makes the “common mistakes,” the figure who “gets it wrong” is the ang moh, a ‘foreigner’ or ‘white person’. (Attributed to Hokkien?? [Mandarin hóng máo, lit. ‘red hair’], the term often refers narrowly to ‘white person/people,’ but also to ‘foreigner’ broadly). As Gwee narrated it (boldface indicates emphasis): “Some consider lah among our most mysterious words, if not the most mysterious word. It’s because we know intuitively what it’s supposed to mean, but the exact meaning isn’t easy to pin down.”A slide appeared on the screen behind him, titled “Don’t Do This.” This section was spent enumerating “common mistakes” in a deadpan comedic style: (1) “getting the tone wrong” (in the sense of intonation, not tonal inflection: i.e. the placement and usage of lah are technically correct, but do not accomplish the user’s intended effect); (2) “dissing the word” as a way to exclude foreigners (this came with a defense: “We’re not using it just to exclude you! [But] you really need to go native to know how to say it as we say it”); (3) making a “Sound of Music joke” (“We’ve already heard ‘Is lah a note to follow so?’ from [a] gazillion ang mohs!”); (4) using it as a form of “hip address” (e.g. “Wazzap lah?”); and (6) as a Romance-Language style feminine definite article (e.g. “lah Little Prince”).The next section—signaled by a slide titled “Origins”—lasted 15?minutes and explored a speculative etymology linking lah to Malay and Sinitic languages. It ended with a caveat: “When we’re dealing with Singlish, we must admit multiplicity and transformation. It’s what makes Singlish lah different [from] Malay or Chinese lah…So the question of origins only goes that far…As with any language, absorbed words move away from their original meaning. So, with lah, there are senses that don’t fall into any source language use.” During the post-lecture Q&A, an audience member added that “Tamil has a lah as well”; Gwee responded animatedly, “So it really does come from all the languages of Singapore!”While Gwee was relatively non-overt as to the targets of his counter-critique, more overt responses to arguments regarding Singlish “origins” can be found in online commentaries posted in response to opinion editorials in Singaporean media. For instance, in 2019 a self-identified Chinese-Singaporean published an article titled, “Look Can We Please Learn How to Spell Malay Words Properly Before Using Them???” (Lam 2019). The piece was framed by the author as a rebuke against their “fellow privileged brethren.” Based on the results of a randomized survey of 4,000 Singaporeans, the author reported that, as suspected, “Chinese people” performed worst of “all races” in their ability to spell Malay words. Though the use of a survey methodology was unusual, the article’s critique was still fairly typical of critiques of racialized majoritarian privilege, in that it used wrong orthography as an index of wrong phonetics, and vice versa. The article opened with an example that I have seen and overheard being debated numerous times: “jelak,” a Malay item that, in Singlish, describes ‘the feeling from eating too much rich food,’ metaphorically, ‘to be tired from doing something too many times.’ Many interlocutors use formulations like “pronouncing the letter t” to index a common verbal error: of replacing a glottal stop—indicated by roman k, i.e. jelak /j?-'la?/—with an aspirated or unaspirated dental stop—indicated by roman t, i.e. jelat /j?-'lat/ or /j?-'lath/.In numerous online responses, however, commentators replied by dismissing the article’s focus on “Chinese-Singaporeans”:T. Y.: Today got so many ang moh try to speak Singlish and make so many mistake. Why the author never talk about this?K. L.: This is just how we Singaporean say it. Minority dun be so sensitive lahComments like the first (by T. Y.) refocused attention on “ang moh” speakers, a group that, like the Chinese-Singaporeans who were the focus of the article, are also suggested to “make so many mistake[s].” Though the comment did not state that Chinese-Singaporeans are not making mistakes, this comment nevertheless attempts to deflect attention away from racialized majoritarian privilege in Singapore, insisting that local–foreign divides deserve the same, or greater, attention in public talk about Singlish, thereby working to rescale the issue as pointing toward an axis of differentiation beyond Singapore. Comments like the second, meanwhile, locate the perceived problem in minority “sensitivities.” As should be clear, this discourse is “postracial” in that counter-critics resist critics’ efforts at making it about a “race.” Instead, counter-critics focus on a nationality—(all) Singaporeans—which a fortiori encompasses and supersedes all the “races” of Singapore. Counter-critics’ demands not to “make it about race” are thus a demand not to make it about Chinese privilege—that is, racialized majoritarian privilege.“Mother Tongue” Sourcing and Racialized Community GatekeepingIn this section, I outline “Mother Tongue” sourcing. I examine instances in which it serves as a strategy for enacting critiques of racialized majoritarian privilege, and show how it also undergirds the imagined necessity of racialized community gatekeeping: that “correct” Singlish ought to be judged by its fidelity to patterns-of-use embodied by (racialized) speakers of (racialized) “Mother Tongues.” When voiced in interaction, speakers’ appeals to “Mother Tongue” sourcing signals a stance directly opposed to those who enact a strategy of postracial policing, thus indexing competing stances regarding the speech communities—“all Singaporeans” versus racialized speakers of “Mother Tongues”—whose habitual use gets taken as the model for competing images of standard against which individual acts of speaking feel correct (or not). When performing “Mother Tongue” sourcing, interactants focalized a majority–minority axis of differentiation as the salient scale of concern, often, but not always, to the exclusion of a concern for constructed local–global divides (and with varying degrees of felt “Mother Tongue” affinity, especially as this is subject to standardizing influences in educational contexts; Starr and Hiramoto 2019). This section revisits the last of the “Words We Love” lectures, all of whose presenters insisted on the importance of embedding Singlish words “in a community”—an articulation of raciolinguistic community gatekeeping.While in “Words We Love: Lah,” tokens of use were few, the remaining lectures in the series differed markedly. All three extensively deployed selections of (auto)ethnographic vignettes and mediatized texts, rather than utilizing abstracted semantic or functional glosses. The first lecture in the series—“Words We Love: Dei”—took place on a Monday evening, delivered by an Indian-born Tamil-Singaporean poet, Shivram. The lecture was presented in a format common to Shivram’s works, juxtaposing found texts sourced from media reportage, online commentary, and recorded spontaneous conversations. It began with a reading of an 880-word Straits Times article from 23 March, 2016, titled “Lee Kuan Yew Turns One Today in Tamilnadu.” The article described a Tamilian boy, Lee Kuan Yew, named after Singapore’s founding Prime Minister in acknowledgement of the historical connections between Tamil Nadu and Singapore. The rest of the lecture comprised a series of vignettes. The first was a childhood memory in which the poet’s two pet goats were slaughtered for Ramadan. As he transitioned between the second and third vignettes, Shivram intoned, with a deadpan monotone and staccato rhythm, “Not all deis are made equal, as you can tell. Some people say dei is kind of like a ‘hey.’ Those people do not know what they are talking about.” This was met by laughter from the audience. He continued, describing a man who was mocked online in 2018 for shouting a prolonged “dei” into a reporter’s camera to express his rage at the death and destruction following an attack on a Malaysian Hindu temple; Shivram then proceeded to show a clip from the Rajinikanth film Baasha; and finally, performed a conversation he once had with a Chinese-Singaporean taxi driver: “Dei you work in I.T. ah? I know a lot of Indian work in I.T., right?”“Words We Love: Lepak” was delivered on Tuesday by the Malay-Singaporean writer, playwright, and television personality, Nessa. The lecture began with an extended description of the sociality and sociology of what was titled “The Malay Lepak”: “To be Malay is not to lepak, but to know how to lepak.” The lecture went on to gloss the term lepak generally as ‘relax/chill,’ but with multiple caveats (i.e. not all relaxing/chilling is lepaking). Nessa then presented a lepak typology, describing each type according to its contextual features, participants, and settings. She noted that stereotypic associations between Malay people and the lepak have long been used in Singapore as evidence of Malay “laziness” and “unproductivity,” but that this fails to understand the way the practice functions “in the community.”On Thursday, the Chinese-Singaporean poet and editor, Christine, delivered the next of the Singlish mini-lectures—“Words We Love: Bojio”—to a packed audience. Unlike the other lectures, Christine began by citing the famed Coxford Singlish Dictionary, an important text in galvanizing resistance to 1990s efforts at eradicating Singlish (Woo and Goh 2007). An image of the Dictionary appeared on the screen behind the lectern: “Bo Jio. ?? Verb. A Hokkien exclamation used to express dismay at not being invited along for an enjoyable event.” As Christine elaborated, the phrase indexes a “quintessentially Hokkien”—not generically Chinese—“FOMO” (fear of missing out). The lecture proceeded through a series of banana-related puns (??bojio ‘did not call’ sounds like ?? bojio ‘without/no banana’; Hokkien jio is shorthand for ?? kimjio ‘banana’) before examining a series of “incorrect” uses, all of them misfires involving the wrong addressee: “[j]ust like you cannot anyhow use lah, you also cannot anyhow5 use bojio. Cannot use bojio with elders, bosses, or children because they are not your friends”).In different ways, each of the three lectures made references to the “appropriation” of Tamil, Malay, and Hokkien words in Singlish. When I later contacted the individual lecturers, I thus took pains to be careful about calling the words “Singlish words,” having assumed that “appropriation” meant claiming that these were Singlish, as opposed to Tamil, Malay, Hokkien, etc. I later realized that I had misinterpreted their concerns. Sitting with Shivram outside a gallery a couple weeks later, he began by critiquing the commonly voiced idea that Singlish unifies all Singaporeans: “[i]f you look at what Singlish actually is- what people actually say it is, it’s very Chinese, and Malay that’s been appropriated…” Here he trailed off. I began to follow up by asking about his lecture without calling the series “Singlish words,” but I turned out to be hedging too much: “The series was all Singlish words,” he cut me off to assert. When I spoke with Christine a month later, she also asserted that, while appropriation is a risk, it rarely occurs: “Hokkien culture is really unique, and you need to understand that to get it, to get bojio. If you don’t get it, you just appropriate the culture. But I really think most people get it.”Later, when interviewing Nessa, the presenter from the “Words We Love: Lepak” lecture, our discussion focused mainly on the issue of errors. Nessa asserted that “most people use lepak wrongly.” However, Nessa focused primarily on errors “pronunciation,” which she sharply distinguished from errors of “use.” Unlike pronunciation errors, she said, errors of use are often not the user’s fault: “Words evolve to become different things, but at least take the root- the- the- the essence of lepak is, you know, essentially Malay, essentially from the Malay community.” In this framing, evolution, everyday use, and origins come together through pronunciation. While evolution leads to “wrong” usage in that it detaches an item from its putative origins, for Nessa, this was not a problem, since the “wrong” form is still regularized across the speech community. The real problem was errors of “pronunciation.” Unlike errors of “use,” these indexed something worse: a “lack of effort.” She contrasted this with the effort made by non-Chinese-Singaporeans to pronounce “Chinese words and names” properly: “I mean, it’s a bit irritating because our national la- our- our national song is in Malay, but I still- we can- all of us know every single non-Malay speaker mispronounces it, then why? Why is that still happening?” Though Nessa initially asserted the consistent pronunciation effort by non-Chinese Singaporeans (which, it was implied by negative parallelism, was not reciprocated), the final turn raised the stakes, rescaling the mispronunciation of Malay in the anthem as a matter of national importance, articulated along raciolinguistic lines.To return to my earlier mistake vis-à-vis “appropriation” talk: I had mistakenly assumed that a Chinese-Singaporean should not use Malay or Tamil words, or should not call them “Singlish” words. Yet what became apparent is that—even when scaled via intra-raciolinguistic distinctions (as with the “Hokkien community,” a subset of the “Chinese community”)—to avoid “appropriation” requires that one “gets it”: that one works to understand a “community” and a “culture,” and to use items focalized as a raciolinguistic community’s cultural patrimony in ways that accord to the images of standard performed by authorized users. In other words, such concerns over Singlish—voiced as “appropriation,” “distorting,” etc.—serve as a ground for indexical inoculation (Silverstein 2017, 152–3; Silverstein 1985): attributed misspellings and mispronunciations of an item comes to index, at a higher order, a majoritarian disrespect for, disregard for, or ignorance of minoritized “races.” This move (re)locates the scale of concern, and the source of images of standard, to the level of majority–minority divides, while also critiquing performances of racialized majoritarian privilege.Conclusion: Images of Standard Without StandardizationIn the final months of my fieldwork research, during an informal gathering at the Singapore Botanic Gardens, a mostly good-natured confrontation occurred between two of my acquaintances, the first (S1) a Chinese-Singaporean man in his 30s, the second (S2) a Malay-Singaporean woman in her mid-20s. It began with S1’s mispronunciation of the aforementioned playwright Alfian Sa’at’s surname, but quickly escalated to a contestation over language, which staged a contrast between postracial policing and “Mother Tongue” sourcing. The initial impetus was not even an overt correction directed at S1, but rather a clarification: his utterance of Sa’at as /'Sai-at/ rather than /Sa?-'at/ was at first unintelligible to me and S2. The referent was clarified relatively quickly, but several turns later, during which time the conversation moved on to other topics, S1 reentered the discussion with what initially seemed like a non sequitur:1S1: Nowadays everybody got problem. Why ah? Nasi lomak,6 jelat, this is just how we Singaporeans say it! Suddenly everybody trying to say not correct, not correct.S2: I speak Malay. I can tell you it’s not correct.5S1: So, Malay is different, you say it differently in Malay, ok lor.7 But Singaporeans have our way to say it, our own pronunciation. Cannot say it’s not correct, it’s just our way.S2: Huh? Malay not Singaporean is it?S1: No:: la::h. Why you say it like tha::t?…So for Malay, it’s different lor. Why10must tell me all other Singaporeans are wrong?It became clear as the interaction unfolded that S1 had taken himself to be interpellated into the role of the “Chinese person butchering Malay”—a role he did not want to play. Deploying common shibboleths of “error” (nasi lomak/lemak and jelat/jelak), S1 went on to dismiss the critique as needlessly racializing and parochial. To counter this, in lines 1–3, 6–7, and 9–10, he claimed “all other Singaporeans” as the measure of Singlish’s “correctness,” not Malay, which is “different.” This was countered in turn by S2 in lines 4 and 8, as she first asserted herself as a raciolinguistic authority—asserting her status as an ethnoracially Malay woman, hence a Malay-language speaker authorized to make metalinguistic judgments—then challenged the exclusion of the category of “Malay” from the broader category of “Singaporeans.”While the turns in this interaction did not focalize or overtly typify any given item as Singlish, nor was Singlish otherwise brought up as such, what remains important for me are the continuities between the roles taken up in this conversation and the enregistered discourse strategies that have been my focus throughout the article. I find it additionally important that S1 was able to so readily deploy a set of items (like nasi lomak/lemak and jelat/jelak) that often rise to the level of awareness as worthy objects of contestation over Singlish. All this suggest to me that the wider contests over images of Singlish standard had come to serve as part of the interaction’s emergent contextualization.I should note that few, if any, of my Singaporean interlocutors subscribe overtly to the idea of a single, unified Singlish. In fact, many argue that multiple Singlishes exist, and that they vary according to socioeconomic class, “race,” and linguistic biography (though such variation is still often imagined in relatively rigid ways). In other words, contests over Singlish norms are rarely focused on standardization through processes and projects aimed at unifying Singlish or subjecting it to the managerial purview of standardizing institutions. And yet, such recognitions of multiplicity are still often subordinated to broader imaginaries according to which there is, or ought to be, a context-free variety—a standardized register—for each articulable stratum of Singlish’s variation. Such stratified envelopes of linguistic enregisterment thus remain deployable in the service of maintaining conic images of a neutral top-and-center for each variety, a top-and-center to which everyone can (and should) aspire, and deviation from which gradiently locates one’s degree of moral failing.This article has traced out two competing discourse registers in Singapore that implicate one another in a structure of available contrastive stances, while also co-participating in the production and maintenance of images of standard. While these are sustained in part by the existence of hegemonic text genres (like dictionaries); mediatized public debates over language; and nested histories of standardization-based education- and language-policy regimes, as I have sought to show, images of standard can be detached from, and circulate beyond, standardization as such. Of course, other scholars of standardizing projects have noted that technical standardizing procedures do not encompass the full range of effects and investments either in standardizing ideologies or individuals’ willingness to submit to, and gatekeep others’ submission to, standard-like linguistic practices. Rather, my effort in this article has been to show how standardization practices in one set of domains can serve as a resource for aestheticizing linguistic practices in other domains and linking them to competing figures of personhood (Agha 2007)—figures that also produce other effects. By detailing images of standard Singlish in their circulation, I have sought to exemplify the broader utility of and provide a methodological anchor for an approach that tracks the movement of an image: an envelope of linguistic practices, evaluative discourses, and competing figures of personhood across a distributed range of sites and objects in situations where there is no standard, but rather only a concern for an aesthetics of standard-likeness. As I have?argued, this allows us to track how social actors concerned with “correct” Singlish speech generate judgements about the raciolinguistic embodiment of speakers, overhearers, and evaluators, and how they draw apparently competing positions together through their co-production of images of standard.AcknowledgmentsI want to thank Eman Elshaikh and Jay Schutte for providing in-depth comments on an early version of this essay, as well as to Rob Gelles, Patrick Lewis, Rachel Howard, Susan Gal, Constantine Nakassis, and attendees at the University of Chicago Semiotics: Culture in Context workshop for generous feedback. Thanks also to Christian Go, Rebecca Lurie Starr, Mie Hiramoto, Kenzell Huggins, and participants in the Sociolinguistics Reading Group at the National University of Singapore Department of English Language and Literature for their detailed, constructive feedback. Research for this paper was supported in part by the Ruth Landes Memorial Research Fund of the Reed Foundation, with additional support from the Lichtstern Fund of the University of Chicago Department of Anthropology.