Title: State Action to Prevent Violence against Women: The Effect of Women’s Police stations on men’s attitudes toward gender-based violence 
Author: Abby Córdova, Helen Kras
Journal: The Journal of Politics
Year: 2022

Abstract
We contribute to literature in public opinion on policy feedback effects by examining how the existence of a women’s police station (WPS) in the place of residence influences citizens’ attitudes toward gender-based violence. With a focus on WPS, we argue that public policies implemented at the local level that criminalize violence against women (VAW) and increase survivors’ access to specialized services are particularly likely to promote attitudes among men that condemn VAW. We find that, in Brazil, men are more likely to reject VAW and support bystander intervention in municipalities with WPS, especially if WPS have been operating for a long time. Further analyses suggest that these findings are neither endogenous nor merely driven by social desirability bias or a deterrence effect. Men’s improved attitudes go hand in hand with lower rates of intimate partner violence. The results have important implications for the implementation of public policies to prevent VAW.

Violence against women (VAW) is a chronic human rights violation across the world. In 2017 alone about 87,000 women were killed on account of their gender worldwide (UNODC 2018). More than 58% of these femicides were committed by an intimate partner or a family member. From 2012 to 2017, the number of femicides related to domestic violence increased by 11% (UNODC 2018), with Africa and Latin America showing the largest increase. Beyond the tragic loss of women’s lives and the adverse consequences for women’s health, VAW poses a high cost for society as a whole, including lower productivity and social capital (Morrison, Ellsberg, and Bott 2007). The cost of intimate partner violence (IPV) as a proportion of the global gross domestic product (GDP) is about 27 times higher than the combined cost of terrorism, civil war, and international conflict (Fearon and Hoeffler 2015).
Empirical studies consistently show that violence-supportive beliefs stemming from sexist attitudes largely drive the perpetration of VAW (e.g., Flood 2011; Peacock and Barker 2014). The incidence of VAW tends to be higher in contexts where there is widespread tolerance toward VAW (e.g., Flood and Pease 2009). Since men are mostly responsible for gender-based crimes, transforming men’s attitudes toward VAW is particularly important for its prevention (e.g., Flood 2011). Drawing from literature in public opinion on policy feedback effects, we theorize that the implementation of women’s police stations (WPS) can help cultivate social norms among men supportive of safer environments for women. WPS constitute an important public policy response to demands from civil society for state action against VAW.
Feminist organizations and transnational advocacy groups have historically mobilized to make the state accountable for VAW and responsible for advocating social norms that reject gender-based violence (e.g., Htun and Weldon 2012, 2018; Medie and Walsh 2019). One of the first steps in this struggle was to promote gender egalitarian attitudes among political elites and press state actors to recognize VAW as a crime. As a result of these efforts, countries have endorsed international conventions that recognize VAW as a state responsibility and a problem that should be penalized by the law. The 1992 UN Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and subsequent international treaties have made calls for the adoption of legislation and implementation of public policies that ensure the protection of women against gender-based violence. Extant literature suggests that public policies can serve as instruments for the diffusion of social norms supportive of a world free of VAW (e.g., Kittilson 2010).
Following the adoption of international conventions, countries across the globe have adopted VAW policies. However, there is great variation in the types of policies adopted and their extent of implementation. An important line of research has examined why some countries implement comprehensive VAW polices while others do not (e.g., Franceschet 2010; Htun and Weldon 2012). Yet, we still know little about the kinds of public policies that are more likely to promote progressive social norms on VAW among the public. Studies that explore the attitudinal effects of state-sponsored VAW awareness campaigns and school interventions that target boys have yielded mixed findings (e.g., Peacock and Barker 2014).
However, the attitudinal effects of a public policy aimed at addressing VAW remain largely understudied: WPS. Since Brazil inaugurated the first WPS in the world more than three decades ago, at least nine countries in Latin America (Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, and Uruguay) and eight others outside the region (Ghana, India, Kosovo, Liberia, the Philippines, Sierra Leone, South Africa, and Uganda) have implemented this policy (Hautzinger 2016; United Nations Women 2011). WPS are specialized police units in charge of preventing, investigating, and punishing VAW. They are designed to offer services “by and for women” (Hautzinger 2016). In practice, because of the low numbers of women in the police, WPS are typically only partially staffed by female police officers (United Nations Women 2011). In addition, service quality is often far from ideal (e.g., Hautzinger 2007; Morrison et al. 2007). Yet, compared to regular police stations, WPS increase survivors’ access to specialized services, including medical services, domestic violence shelters, and restraining orders (e.g., Lima and Souza 2009). Moreover, quantitative evidence shows that WPS have reduced VAW rates in Brazil and Peru and increased reporting to the police in Peru and India (Amaral, Bhalotra, and Prakash 2019; Kavanaugh, Sviatschi, and Trako 2019; Perova and Reynolds 2017).
In this article, we argue that WPS promote progressive attitudes toward VAW among men, thereby addressing one of the underlying causes of gender-based violence. WPS increase the police’s role in the prevention and punishment of VAW, highlighting its criminal nature. As such, we posit that in localities with a WPS, men are more likely to condemn VAW and believe that it is never justified. By lowering men’s tolerance toward gender-based violence and providing specialized services to survivors, WPS are also likely to increase men’s support for bystander intervention. When there is a WPS in town, men are more likely to perceive that calling the police to report VAW is worthwhile, thereby reinforcing bystander intervention attitudes. In short, we argue that, as WPS criminalize VAW and increase survivors’ access to specialized services, WPS promote progressive attitudes toward VAW among men, particularly if a WPS has been operating for a long time in the place of residence. Importantly, we theorize that these feedback effects are possible because WPS are highly visible in the towns where they have been enacted, making citizens aware of WPS’ existence and increasing their likelihood of receiving a clear message: VAW is a crime.
The empirical evidence lends strong support to our hypotheses. In the context of Brazil, we find that men are more likely to reject VAW and support bystander intervention, the longer a WPS has been operating in a municipality. Further analyses indicate that these findings are neither endogenous nor driven by social desirability bias or a deterrence effect, suggesting that WPS contribute to the internalization of values supportive of a safer environment for women. Indeed, additional analyses suggest that improved attitudes do translate into improved behavior, as the literature posits (e.g., Flood and Pease 2009). We show that women are less likely to experience IPV in municipalities with a WPS compared to women in places without one. Moreover, we do not find evidence that men’s improved attitudes are merely explained by fear of punishment.
Our theoretical insights and findings contribute to the literature in public opinion on policy feedback effects and scholarly work that examines the role of government in the eradication of VAW. The findings have important policy implications. They suggest that an integral strategy to eradicate VAW should address its underlying causes, and this can be facilitated by police reforms that prioritize the enactment and sustainability of WPS across national territories. To reap WPS’ benefits on attitudes toward gender-based violence, WPS must be permanent and citizens should perceive them as an important resource available to survivors of VAW.

Violence against Women Policies and Feedback Effects on Public Opinion
Scholars have theorized and empirically shown that public policy implementation influences mass attitudes and opinions—thereby generating policy feedback effects (e.g., Campbell 2012; Mettler 2019; Mettler and Soss 2004). Public policy implementation shapes public opinion on an array of issues, including policy preferences (e.g., Soroka and Wlezien 2010), state institutions (e.g., Weaver and Lerman 2010), and policy beneficiaries (e.g., Mettler and Soss 2004). More relevant for the focus of this article, studies have also demonstrated that public policies generate feedback effects on social norms (e.g., Pacheco 2013). When the state implements a policy, it signals what behaviors are considered appropriate in society. As Pacheco (2013, 715) puts it, public policies can affect public opinion “by educating the public about what is socially acceptable.” Recent empirical studies lend support to this proposition.
For instance, Kreitzer, Hamilton, and Tolbert (2014) find that passing legislation to allow same-sex marriage generates positive attitudes toward sexual minorities. Similarly, the literature suggests that gender policies shape citizens’ normative views about women’s role in society. McDonagh (2010), for example, theorizes that public policies that promote equality between men and women cultivate the view that women are suitable for public office. Research investigating the effects of public policies that promote dual-earner families, such as the provision of child care, posits that these policies foster citizen support for women’s participation in the job market (Sjöberg 2004). Scholars also theorize that state-led initiatives on VAW can generate feedback effects on citizens’ attitudes. As Kittilson (2010, 217) states, “the adoption and expansion of national policies on issues such as … violence against women carry important messages to the electorate.”
We argue that the implementation of VAW policies signals that VAW lays outside the range of socially acceptable behavior. Thus, policies aimed at protecting women from gender-based violence can promote more progressive attitudes toward VAW. This theoretical proposition raises important questions about the mechanisms that explain this effect and the type of public policies that are particularly likely to shape social norms. Next, we develop our theoretical framework, arguing that the implementation of WPS is a particularly effective strategy to maximize policy feedback effects on attitudes supportive of women’s safety.

Explaining Policy Feedback Effects on Attitudes toward Gender-Based Violence
Previous literature suggests that, when asked to express their thoughts on a given issue, citizens form an opinion through a “top of the head” process relying on heuristic information from political elites (Zaller 1992), including policy implementation. Conceived in this way, public policies shape public opinion through a top-down signaling mechanism in which the state transmits important messages to citizens (Gusmano, Schlesinger, and Thomas 2002). Public policy implementation can serve as a source of information that generates “interpretative effects” among the public (Pierson 1993, 626). Taking into account these theoretical insights, we argue that, when asked to emit an opinion on VAW, citizens resort to elite cues drawn from VAW policies. That is, VAW policies can result in more progressive attitudes toward VAW by signaling that VAW is never justified or acceptable. However, we argue that this signaling mechanism is more likely to occur in the short term, when policies are relatively new.
In the long run, citizens are more likely to internalize policy messages rather than simply use them as heuristic information (Kreitzer et al. 2014; Pacheco 2013). As time passes, public policies can shape social norms through a learning mechanism that results in more deep-rooted attitudes (Kreitzer et al. 2014). When a given policy has been implemented for a long time, citizens are more likely to know about its existence and purpose, resulting in stronger policy feedback effects and more deep-seated beliefs. Consequently, we posit that long-lived policies on VAW are more likely to promote social norms and result in more entrenched values that condemn gender-based violence, compared to newly implemented policies.
Our theoretical framework also predicts that VAW policies will have differential feedback effects between men and women. The signaling and learning mechanisms described above will primarily take place among men. Previous literature suggests that public policies can aid citizens to form opinions on issues that are of primary concern for policy targets. Individuals are less likely to have crystallized views on matters that disproportionately affect others. Consequently, when asked their opinion on issues that appear distant, citizens are more likely to resort to information drawn from elite cues (e.g., Morgan and Buice 2013). This suggests that men are more likely to resort to information from gender equality policies to form an opinion on problems that predominantly affect women. By contrast, compared to men, women are more likely to have firm opinions on issues that affect them directly (e.g., Barnes and Córdova 2016; Mansbridge 1999; Morgan and Buice 2013). Thus, we anticipate that men will be more likely to condemn VAW when the state implements public policies on VAW than when no policies are in place. Women in general are less likely than men to justify VAW, independent of policy implementation. In short, VAW policies are particularly relevant to educate men about women’s right to live in a society that protects them from violence.
Although the theoretical framework described above is general and can inform the study of feedback effects derived from VAW policies more broadly, we identify WPS as a public policy particularly likely to improve men’s attitudes toward gender-based violence in the short and long run. More specifically, we theorize that WPS can lower men’s tolerance toward VAW and result in higher support for bystander intervention, especially when WPS have been operating for a long time. The nature and design features of WPS maximize their potential to result in these outcomes. Building on the theoretical framework laid out above, we proceed to identify mechanisms through which WPS can shape men’s views on VAW.

Women’s Police Stations and Effects on Attitudes toward Gender-Based Violence
Citizens rely largely on the actions of judicial institutions to form opinions on what constitutes a crime and the seriousness of a crime (e.g., Salazar et al. 2003). Consequently, when the state criminalizes VAW, it shapes social norms on gender-based violence by educating the public that VAW constitutes wrongdoing (Salazar et al. 2003). We argue that, when the state takes strong action against gender-based violence and gets the police actively involved in bringing perpetrators to justice, it signals that VAW is a serious crime. We posit that the establishment of a WPS within the local area transmits such a message, resulting in lower tolerance toward VAW, particularly among men. Moreover, as WPS result in lower tolerance toward VAW, WPS are also likely to prompt men to be more supportive of bystander intervention. Knowing the VAW is a crime, men are more likely to reject VAW and consequently believe that anyone witnessing VAW should report it to the police.
A “resource effect” (Campbell 2012) can also reinforce support for bystander intervention. As Pierson (1993) suggests, public policies can facilitate access to resources that make certain activities worthwhile. WPS criminalize VAW but also increase access to specialized services, which can lead citizens to perceive that denouncing VAW to the police can be beneficial to survivors. Thus, WPS can result in higher support for bystander intervention in the towns where they have been enacted, particularly among men who in the absence of a WPS would likely express lower support. In short, WPS can promote bystander intervention attitudes among men via increased intolerance toward VAW and a resource effect. Yet, a resource effect is likely to occur insofar as men perceive that WPS are more effective to handle VAW than regular police stations. If men perceive that WPS serve survivors better, this can reinforce men’s support for bystander intervention in towns with a WPS. Although WPS can trigger a resource effect on support for bystander intervention among women, we expect this effect to be stronger among men. As explained previously, VAW policies are more likely to influence men’s beliefs on VAW than women’s.
In sum, our theoretical discussion indicates that the central role that the police play in the criminalization of VAW and in the provision of specialized services makes WPS particularly likely to promote intolerance toward VAW and create support for bystander intervention among men. In addition, the theoretical insights discussed previously suggest that, the longer a WPS has been operating in a given locality, the stronger these feedback effects will be. Further, we argue that the design features of WPS make this policy highly visible among the public, which maximizes WPS’ potential to generate feedback effects.
Public policies that are salient to citizens are more likely to influence citizens’ attitudes (e.g., Campbell 2012; Mettler 2019; Pierson 1993). Three reinforcing characteristics make WPS visible, and therefore salient, among the public: (1) WPS are implemented at the local level, (2) WPS require the building of physical infrastructure, and (3) as part of their functions, WPS disseminate information on the services they provide. These characteristics facilitate citizens’ knowledge of WPS’ existence and purpose. Moreover, this knowledge is likely to be more widespread when WPS have been operating in towns for a long time.
Citizens are more likely to be aware of government-provided local services on VAW than about the provision of similar services in more distant and centralized locations. This is especially the case when offices where services are provided are visible. WPS are enacted in local government jurisdictions and necessitate the creation of physical spaces for police officers and other staff to work. WPS’ offices typically have visible signs outside of their facilities with their proper names (e.g., Delegacia de Defensa da Mulher de Itapevi, São Paulo, Brazil). By contrast, in an effort to protect survivors, the location of other services provided to victims, such as domestic violence shelters, are rarely advertised and consequently unknown by the general public. In short, we identity the existence of physical infrastructure at the local level that advertises specialized police services for women as one of the mechanisms through which citizens learn about the operation of a WPS in their place of residence.
From our extensive fieldwork in two Latin American countries (Brazil and El Salvador), we also learned that WPS raise public awareness of the services they provide through the media and police officers’ visits to marginalized areas. For example, in Brazil, radio stations in São Paulo broadcast ads that provide information on the services that the local WPS provide and how the public can get in contact to denounce VAW (June 2019). In Porto Alegre, one of the head police officers of a WPS explained, “officers organize regular visits in different regions of the city to inform citizens of WPS’ services, what gender-based violence looks like, and where people can go to press charges. The day following such talks is the busiest at the WPS due to high demand” (July 2019). Our fieldwork in Brazil supports previous studies’ conclusion that “one of the major successes of specialist stations for women is how they made the general public more aware of the issue of violence against women” in the cities where they operate (Wilding 2012, 70).
Our theoretical discussion leads us to draw two main testable hypotheses about the likely feedback effects of WPS on attitudes toward VAW:
H1. 
Men who live in towns with a WPS will be more likely to reject VAW and express bystander intervention attitudes than their counterparts in towns without a WPS.
H2. 
The longer a WPS has been enacted in the place of residence, the higher men’s probability of rejecting VAW and expressing bystander intervention attitudes will be.


Case Study: Women’s Police Stations in Brazil
Brazil constitutes an ideal case study to test our hypotheses. Although the majority of municipalities still lack a WPS, it is the country with the largest number of WPS in Latin America and the first one to establish a WPS in the world (United Nations Women 2011). As such, focusing on Brazil allows us to maximize variation in the existence and age of WPS across municipalities. The first WPS was established in 1985 in the municipality of São Paulo as a result of feminist mobilization that pushed the state government to address VAW (Hautzinger 2007). Since then, the number of WPS has increased across the country. Yet, their geographic coverage is still very low. By 2018, there were about 460 WPS operating across the national territory, with presence in only 8.3% of the 5,570 municipalities in the country (IBGE 2019).
The expansion of WPS in recent years has largely been the result of the federal government’s adoption of comprehensive legislation on domestic violence in 2006, known as the Maria da Penha law. The law mandates the coordination between the federal, state, and municipal governments in the implementation of programs to eradicate VAW. It explicitly requires the implementation of WPS, which constitute the main entry point for survivors’ access to the justice system and VAW services (United Nations Women 2011). The civil police, an institution centralized at the state level, is mainly responsible for the operation of WPS. However, WPS need to coordinate their work with other institutions on the ground, including municipal governments. Typically, WPS are created as a result of partnerships between the state and municipal governments, since the latter often provide the physical space where WPS operate (Pasinato and Santos 2008). To ensure the implementation of the Maria da Penha law, some municipal governments have adopted legislation on VAW, promoting collaboration between WPS and municipal governments in the provision of VAW services. For example, Rio de Janeiro’s municipal law establishes that the local government should guarantee the creation and operation of domestic violence shelters, which is a key asset for WPS to protect victims. In brief, WPS play a fundamental role in the implementation of the Maria da Penha law and often do so in coordination with state and municipal governments. In the appendix, we provide a more detailed description of the Maria da Penha law and legislation on VAW at other levels of government as well as their implications for the functioning of WPS.
Survivors of VAW turn to WPS to press charges against their aggressors, request a restraining order, and seek access to services, such as medical and psychological attention and women’s shelters (Hautzinger 2007). The majority of complaints tend to involve IPV, but WPS also investigate other gender-based crimes, including defamation and femicides. However, the provision of services is often far from ideal. Most WPS are understaffed, operate under limited hours, and have scarce resources, and officers often do not receive gender sensitization training (Hautzinger 2007). Moreover, the low number of women in the police limits their expansion and operation.
Despite their limited coverage and far from ideal service quality, WPS are the main institutional channel through which VAW is addressed in Brazil (Santos 2010). Even though survivors who live in municipalities without a WPS can press charges against their aggressors in regular police stations, abused women are less likely to receive the attention they need in these stations compared to WPS. In regular stations, gender-based violence is often perceived as a less serious crime and consequently not given priority (Lima and Souza 2009). Importantly, citizens recognize WPS as more effective than regular police stations to address VAW, making the generation of a “resource effect” likely, as we argue. Our analysis of data from the 2013 Data Popular and the Instituto Patricia Galvão survey revealed that over 80% of men and women identify WPS as the most effective government program to address domestic violence in the country. Not surprisingly, when asked where victims of IPV should seek help first, a much higher percentage of men and women spontaneously responded WPS (48%) than regular police stations (27%) or family and friends (21%). Moreover, only about 3% mentioned any other governmental VAW service. These descriptive statistics suggest that WPS are likely to promote support for bystander intervention through a resource effect, as we posit. Citizens perceive WPS as more suited to deal with gender-based violence than regular police stations and other public institutions.

Data, Measurement, and Method
To test our hypotheses, we use data from the 2013 Data Popular and the Instituto Patricia Galvão survey, which is nationally representative of the adult population in urban areas. The sample consists of 1,501 face-to-face interviews carried out in 100 randomly selected municipalities across the five regions of the country. The strategy for the randomization of municipalities ensured the representation of large municipalities in the sample but also the inclusion of small municipalities. In the sample, 46% of municipalities have a WPS, and 49.6% of interviews were conducted in those municipalities. We combine the survey data with municipal-level indicators from various sources.1 Data from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics allow us to identify municipalities with a WPS. We complement these data with information from the National Secretariat of Public Safety on the number of years each WPS has been functioning in a given municipality.
The first dependent variable is a survey item that examines respondents’ degree of intolerance toward VAW. On a Likert scale from 1 to 5, where 1 means “strongly disagree” and 5 “strongly agree,” respondents were asked how much they agree with the following well-known Brazilian saying, “women should not be beaten even with a flower” (Em mulher não se bate nem com uma flor). We find that 66.5% of men strongly agree with this statement, while 78.5% of women do, suggesting that men in general are more tolerant of VAW than women. The second dependent variable examines respondents’ bystander intervention attitudes. On the same 1–5 scale, respondents were asked the extent to which they agree that, “if a person sees a man beating a woman, he or she should report it to the police.” The percentage of men and women strongly agreeing with this statement is 61.4 and 67.5, respectively—depicting a smaller but statistically significant gender gap (
p
<
.05
). Our two dependent variables measure related but distinct attitudes toward VAW.2 Both entail disapproving VAW, but the latter involves going a step further—calling for citizen action to stop VAW and thus perceiving it as a public issue that concerns everyone.
At the individual level, our main independent variable is gender, coded 1 for female and 0 for male respondents. At the municipal level, the first core independent variable is Women’s Police Stations (WPS), coded 1 if a WPS has been established in a municipality or 0 otherwise. The second independent variable indicates the number of years a WPS had been functioning in a given municipality at the time of the public opinion survey. Most municipalities in Brazil only have one WPS, but for those few in our data set with more than one, we estimated the number of years since WPS creation using information for the oldest one. The age of WPS across municipalities ranges from 2 to 28 years, with municipalities without a WPS coded 0.3 To test hypothesis 1, we include an interaction term in our models between the gender and WPS variables. Similarly, to test hypothesis 2, we interact gender with years since WPS creation.
Our models also control for a series of variables at the municipal and individual levels. At the municipal level, we control for the adoption of VAW legislation. As mentioned above, some municipal governments, such as Rio de Janeiro, have passed legislation to promote the implementation of the Maria da Penha law and consequently support local efforts to eradicate VAW. Since it is possible that WPS have been established primarily in municipalities that have passed VAW laws, we control for the adoption of VAW legislation and interact this variable with gender. At the municipal level, our models also control for the existence of regular police stations. Although most municipalities in Brazil do have a regular police station, we include this variable in our models to rule out the possibility that the effect of WPS is driven by the existence of a regular police station. In addition, our models control for municipalities’ population size, femicide rate, and GDP per capita.
Our theory suggests that WPS are important drivers of feedback effects on attitudes toward VAW at the local level, independent of perceptions of state performance as a whole. That is, in the absence of local police units that target VAW specifically, positive feelings toward the state’s role in improving VAW will not be sufficient to significantly improve attitudes toward VAW, particularly support for bystander intervention. As such, at the individual level our models control for citizens’ perceptions that the state supports victims to denounce VAW. We also control for presidential approval. At the time of the survey, Brazil had a leftist female president, Dilma Rousseff. Previous studies suggest that the presence and support of women in high public offices is likely to improve attitudes toward women in general (e.g., Morgan and Buice 2013). We use this variable as a proxy for support for both a female president and a leftist political leader.4 At the individual level, we also account for gender views identified in the literature as important predictors of attitudes toward VAW. We include a survey item on support for traditional gender roles, which asks whether “women’s role is to take care of household chores.” We also control for respondents’ perceptions that IPV is a private issue and views of gender-based discrimination. The latter corresponds to a survey item that captures opinions on whether there is discrimination against women in society. Finally, the models include demographic and socioeconomic indicators at the individual level: education, perceived social class, household wealth, age, race, number of children, and marital status.
To test our hypotheses, we estimate two-level models that account for the nested structure of the data (e.g., Snijders and Bosker 2012).5 We take into account clustering effects at the municipal level in the estimation of standard errors. Since the two dependent variables of interest are ordinal, we estimate ordered logistic multilevel models with random effects for the intercept at the municipal level.

Results
We first examine the results for the first dependent variable, intolerance toward VAW. As expected, model 1 in Table 1, the baseline model, shows that, on average, women are more likely to reject VAW than men (
p
<
.001
). Moreover, model 1 shows that the existence of a WPS in the place of residence does not appear to have an effect on citizens’ likelihood of rejecting VAW, at least on average. However, model 2 shows a negative and statistically significant interaction between the gender and WPS variables (
p
<
.01
). Since all constituent terms of an interaction need to be taken into account, we estimate predicted probabilities and present the results graphically. Figure 1A shows mean predicted probabilities separately for men and women when the WPS variable takes a value of 1 or 0. We then estimate the average gender gap at each value of the WPS variable (1 or 0). The gap is the difference in the mean predicted probabilities between men and women, with higher values indicating a higher probability of rejecting VAW among women than men. Figure 1B presents the gender gap in municipalities with and without a WPS and its respective 95% confidence intervals (CIs; represented by dashed lines). If CIs cross the zero line, the gender gap is not statistically significant.
Figure 1A shows the mean predicted probability of strongly agreeing that women should not be beaten (i.e., scoring a value of 5 on the 1–5 scale). For men living in municipalities without a WPS, the predicted probability is only about 63.8%, while for women it is 82.5%. In municipalities with a WPS, however, men’s probability of rejecting VAW becomes similar to women’s. In towns with a WPS, men’s probability is about 80.6%. Consistent with hypothesis 1, this represents a statistically significant increase among men of 16.8 percentage points. Although we observe a slight increase in women’s probability as well, we find that this effect is not statistically significant. As the theory that sustains hypothesis 1 suggests, men are more likely than women to rely on information drawn from WPS to form an opinion on VAW. Figure 1B shows that, although in municipalities without a WPS there is a statistically significant gender gap in the probability of rejecting VAW of almost 19 points, the gap is no longer statistically significant in municipalities with a WPS.
Models 3–4 in Table 1 show the results when we use the years since WPS creation variable. Once again, when we use this variable, we do not observe that the existence of a WPS has a statistically significant average effect (see model 3). It is only when we account for possible gender effects that we find statistically significant results. In model 4, there is a statistically significant interaction effect between the age of WPS and gender (
p
<
.01
). Based on model 4, figure 2 depicts the mean predicted probabilities when we use the years since WPS creation variable. Consistent with hypothesis 2, we find that the probability of strongly agreeing that women should not be beaten goes up as the number of years of WPS creation increases, but mostly among men (see fig. 2A).
On average, men who live in municipalities where WPS were first enacted are around 20% more likely to strongly reject VAW compared to men in municipalities with a newly established WPS or without one. By contrast, we do not observe a statistically significant effect for women. Figure 2B shows that the gender gap in the probability of rejecting VAW decreases as the number of years of WPS creation increases. However, the gap remains statistically significant in municipalities with relatively old WPS. It is only in municipalities with WPS older than 18 years that the gender gap closes (i.e., CIs cross the line set at zero). Yet, it is important to mention that even in municipalities that have had a WPS for a long time, at least 15% of men and women still condone VAW.
We now turn to the results associated with our second dependent variable. Models 5 and 7 in Table 1, the baseline models, only shows weak differences in bystander intervention attitudes between men and women. Similarly, in these models the coefficients of the WPS and years since WPS creation variables do not depict strong independent effects. However, for this dependent variable, we also find important gender effects associated with the existence of a WPS and the number of years it has been operating in a municipality. Models 2 and 8 reveal a negative and statistically significant interaction effect between gender and the WPS and years since WPS creation variables, respectively. The existence of a WPS in a municipality positively influences men’s support for bystander intervention, and this effect is stronger, the longer a WPS has been functioning. We present these results in figures 3 and 4. The results resemble those presented above.
We find that in municipalities with a WPS, men are 81.7% likely to strongly agree that a person should call the police if he or she witnesses VAW. By contrast, this percentage is only 56.0% for men living in municipalities without a WPS (see fig. 3A). This represents a statistically significant difference of 25.7 points. Although we observe an upward trend for women, this effect is not statistically significant. Moreover, although there is a statistically significant gender gap in bystander attitudes in municipalities without a WPS of more than 13 points, in municipalities with a WPS the gap disappears (see fig. 3B).
In figure 4, we also observe that these effects are stronger in municipalities that have had a WPS for a longer time. It is only when a WPS is at least 14 years old that the gender gap is no longer statistically significant (i.e., at this point CIs cross the zero line in fig. 4B). Here too it is important to mention that bystander intervention attitudes are not universal even in municipalities that have had a WPS for a long time. In sum, the findings in Table 1 give strong support to our expectation that the existence of a WPS at the local level shapes men’s opinions on the acceptability of VAW and bystander intervention, particularly when WPS have been functioning for a long time. Importantly, we do not find evidence that passing municipal-level VAW legislation by itself leads to improved attitudes toward VAW.
As shown in Table 1, in addition to WPS, other contextual and individual-level factors have an independent contribution in the formation of attitudes toward VAW. We observe that higher economic development at the municipal level, as measured by GDP per capita, is associated with a lower likelihood of rejecting VAW. Moreover, consistent with the findings of previous studies, we find that support for traditional gender roles is correlated with a lower probability of rejecting VAW. We also find that individuals who perceive discrimination against women are more likely to reject gendered violence and support bystander intervention. Perceiving that the state supports victims of VAW also predicts our two dependent variables, but exerts a stronger effect on bystander intervention attitudes. In addition, believing that VAW is a private issue lowers the probability of supporting bystander intervention. Finally, approval of President Dilma Rousseff’s government does not influence our dependent variables, suggesting that support for a female or leftist political leader is not correlated with progressive attitudes toward VAW. Moreover, none of the demographic and socioeconomic variables exert strong effects on our two dependent variables.

Social Desirability and Deterrence Effects
In this section, we examine whether the findings presented above are merely the result of social desirability bias or likely to reflect entrenched values. In towns where WPS have been operating for a long time, knowing that the state considers VAW a crime, men might simply provide a politically correct answer when asked their opinion on VAW. Alternatively, men in those towns might have embraced more progressive attitudes toward VAW, reflecting more deep-rooted social values. To determine whether WPS influence men’s attitudes in a substantive way, it is important to examine their behavior. We explore empirically whether the theorized effects derived from WPS go hand in hand with a lower probability of IPV. The survey data allow us to examine two indicators: personal knowledge of a victim of IPV and personal experience with IPV (tables A2 and A3).
Disturbingly, over 50% of survey respondents report knowing an IPV victim. To explore whether this number varies depending on the age of WPS, we estimate a multilevel model that interacts this variable with gender, controlling for municipal and individual-level characteristics. We find that, on average, women are more likely to say they know a victim of IPV than are men, suggesting that victims are more open to share their experiences with other women. However, women’s probability of knowing an IPV victim varies across municipalities depending on the age of WPS creation. In municipalities without a WPS, 65.5% of women are likely to report knowing a victim of IPV (see fig. 5A). This number is 45.4% in municipalities that have had a WPS the longest. Men’s probability of knowing a victim of IPV declines slightly as the age of WPS increases, but this effect is not statistically significant. In older municipalities, men and women show a similar probability of knowing an IPV victim (fig. 5B).
Similarly, we find that, on average, about 18% of women report having personally experienced IPV and that this number varies depending on whether women live in a municipality with or without a WPS (fig. 6). The total sample for this analysis consists of 688 women with 124 of them reporting a personal experience with IPV. Because of the relatively small sample size, we use the dichotomous indicator of WPS as independent variable (
WPS
=
1
 or 0), instead of years since WPS creation. We find that, in municipalities without a WPS, the probability of experiencing IPV is 24.7%, while this number is 13.6% in municipalities with a WPS, representing a statistically significant difference of 11.1 points (
p
<
.05
).
Our results are consistent with the findings of previous studies showing that WPS have improved women’s safety in Brazil. Perova and Reynolds (2017) find that WPS have decreased femicide rates by about 17% in metropolitan municipalities. We show that the incidence of IPV is lower in municipalities with a WPS. Taken together, the evidence suggests that feedback effects on attitudes toward VAW are unlikely to be merely the result of social desirability—improved attitudes toward VAW manifest in improved behavior. Still, more progressive VAW attitudes and lower levels of VAW in municipalities with a WPS can be the result of a deterrence effect rather than deep-rooted values that condemn VAW.
When the state implements policies that punish perpetrators of VAW, men learn that those who support and engage in this kind of violence can face costly sanctions, including incarceration. Consequently, public policies that criminalize VAW and enforce the law can arguably create strong incentives among men to disassociate themselves from gender-based violence out of fear of being blamed and punished for wrongdoing. As such, a deterrence effect, rather than the internalization of values, might be the main underlying force driving the theorized effects. We test this possibility empirically using an item in the survey that examines respondents’ perceptions that the state punishes aggressions against women. If a deterrence effect were explaining the link between the existence of a WPS and improved VAW attitudes, we would find evidence that men’s perceptions that the state punishes aggressions against women mediate the effect of WPS on attitudes toward VAW. When we restrict the sample to men, we find that the perception that the state punishes aggressors does not predict attitudes toward VAW in municipalities either with or without a WPS (table A4). This null effect persists in municipalities where WPS have been operating for more than 18 years (table A5). In short, we do not find evidence that our results are explained by a deterrence effect.

Additional Analyses
In this section, we first check the robustness of our results to the inclusion of additional control variables. In a second step, we address the possibility of endogeneity quasi experimentally. Finally, we test empirically a core underlying assumption of our theory: citizens’ awareness of the existence of a WPS in their municipality, particularly when WPS have been operating for a long time.

The effect of feminist movements and other factors
One concern is that the results presented in Table 1 are confounded by other municipal-level factors that might affect both the probability of having a WPS and attitudes toward VAW. The history of feminist movements at the municipal level is one such factor. Feminist movements played an important role in lobbying the state to address VAW in Brazil, resulting in the inauguration of the first WPS in the city of São Paulo in 1985 (Hautzinger 2007; Santos 2010). Consequently, it is possible that citizens in municipalities with a long history of women’s organization are more likely to express progressive attitudes toward VAW, leading them to advocate for the expansion of WPS beyond São Paulo. As such, our results might be capturing the effect of feminist movements on attitudes toward VAW, rather than the effect of WPS. To examine this possibility, we control for two alternative indicators of women movements’ history at the municipal level. The first variable registers the age of the oldest feminist organization present in a municipality at the time of the survey. The second one is a count of the total number of protest marches led by feminist groups in a given municipality in 2013 or any year prior based on records available in Google News archives. When we replicate the statistical analyses presented in figures 1–4 and control for either of these two variables, our results remain substantively similar, suggesting that the effect of WPS is not confounded by the history or activism of feminist movements at the municipal level (tables A6 and A7). Moreover, we test the possibility that the results might be explained by feedback effects from the Maria da Penha law, rather than from WPS. We do not find evidence that this is the case. After controlling for citizens’ knowledge about the Maria da Penha law, the effect of WPS remains statistically significant (table A8). Additional analyses test the robustness of our results to alternative control variables. More specifically, our conclusions do not change if we control for homicide rates, instead of femicides, and when we control for education at the municipal level, instead of GDP per capita (tables A9 and A10).6

Addressing endogeneity
Since the assignment of WPS to municipalities did not occur at random, we need to examine further the possibility that our results are driven by confounding factors or affected by reversed causality. To address endogeneity in a quasi-experimental fashion, we employ a weighting method based on propensity scores applied to multilevel modeling (e.g., Leite et al. 2015).7 First, we employ propensity score matching to obtain two groups of municipalities that are similar on a series of municipal-level covariates, except for treatment assignment: the existence of a WPS. One group has received the treatment (
WPS
=
1
), and the other serves as a control group (
WPS
=
0
). Thus, matching at the cluster level allows us to simulate the assignment of municipalities to treatment and control groups as if it had occurred at random subject to a list of observable covariates (Angrist and Pischke 2009). The estimation of a propensity score first involves selecting covariates that predict the treatment condition.
Population size has been an influential factor to establish a WPS in a given municipality. The federal government has promoted the enactment of WPS in larger municipalities, albeit it has not specified a population threshold (Secretaria de Políticas para as Mulheres 2010). On average, municipalities with a WPS tend to have a larger population size than those without one, although among all municipalities with a WPS the size of the population varies drastically.8 This tendency has resulted in the concentration of WPS in municipalities with higher development levels, at least on average. Consequently, we include population size as a predictor in the propensity score equation along with GDP per capita. Moreover, to account for the possibility that WPS have been primarily established in the most dangerous cities, we also include the homicide rate for each municipality.
We find that the resulting matched sample is balanced on the variables included in the propensity score, reducing bias between treatment and control groups for each of these variables by more than 95% compared to the unmatched sample (table A12). As such, we do not find that our matching strategy is making imbalance worse, as can often occur (King and Nielsen 2019). The resulting matched sample, balanced on population size, GDP per capita, and homicide rates, consists of 44 municipalities, half of them in the treatment group. The matched sample only includes small and less developed municipalities (table A13). The total number of individuals interviewed in these municipalities is 558, almost equally split in the treatment and control groups. To estimate treatment effects, we need to account for the nested structure of our data (i.e., individuals within municipalities). Consequently, we run multilevel models using the matched sample adjusted by the weight variable generated from the matching procedure (Leite et al. 2015; tables A14 and A15). The findings show that, in municipalities without a WPS, there is a gender gap in citizens’ probability of rejecting VAW and supporting bystander intervention (
p
<
.05
). Yet, men’s and women’s attitudes toward VAW are similar in municipalities with a WPS, suggesting that WPS generate policy feedback effects, as we argue. As can be observed in figures 7 and 8, which graph the results of our multilevel models based on the matched sample, the results remain similar to those reported above. Moreover, when we replicate the analysis exploring the effect of WPS on personal experience with IPV using the matched sample, we find similar findings. The incidence of IPV is lower in municipalities with a WPS (table A16).
Awareness of the existence of a WPS
A core assumption of our theory is that citizens know about the existence of a WPS in their municipality, particularly when it has been functioning for a long time. Here we examine the validity of this assumption. We use as a dependent variable an item in the survey that asks respondents whether they know the exact location of a WPS in their municipality. After controlling for demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, we find that men’s and women’s knowledge of the location of a WPS is statistically significantly higher when WPS have been operating for a longer time (
p
<
.01
). The probability of knowing the location of a WPS goes up sharply, by more than 35 percentage points, among men and women, when a WPS has been operating for a long time in the municipality. We present these results in the appendix (table A17 and fig. A1).

Conclusion and Policy Implications
The evidence shows that the implementation of women’s police stations (WPS) has the potential to address an important underlying cause of violence against women (VAW)—men’s attitudes toward gender-based violence. In the context of Brazil, men are more likely to reject VAW and support bystander intervention when there is a WPS in their municipality, particularly if it has been operating for a long time. Moreover, intimate partner violence (IPV) rates are lower in municipalities with a WPS compared to those without one, suggesting that WPS’ positive influence on men’s attitudes has a meaningful effect on behavior. Taken together, our statistical analyses suggest that our findings are not merely the result of an endogeneity issue, social desirability bias, or a deterrence effect. WPS have the potential to cultivate deep-rooted social norms supportive of safer environments for women.
Our research supports the United Nations’ conclusion that “the greatest contribution of the WPS has been to make violence against women more visible as a public-sphere issue, a crime, and a collective matter” (United Nations Women 2011, 1). When the police take strong action to eradicate VAW and WPS are implemented across municipalities, the state sends a strong message to the public: VAW is a criminal act. As time goes by, men internalize this message and become more likely to reject VAW and adopt bystander intervention attitudes. Moreover, WPS are likely to reinforce men’s support for bystander intervention by increasing survivors’ access to specialized services. When there is a WPS in town, men are more likely to perceive that calling the police to report VAW is worthwhile. Indeed, citizens in general perceive WPS as a more effective resource to address VAW than regular police stations. WPS’ design features make policy feedback effects on attitudes toward VAW possible. Notably, WPS are salient among the public, because they are visible at the local level and their mandate often involves police officers’ engagement in awareness building on VAW in the municipalities where WPS operate.
The findings of our research have important policy implications for Brazil and countries across the world tasked with the responsibility of eradicating VAW. First, our research highlights the importance of WPS implementation as part of an integral strategy to address gender-based violence. Yet, WPS can only result in substantial improvements in men’s attitudes toward VAW and lower VAW rates if WPS are permanent. As the case of Brazil shows, the sustainability of WPS depends on governments’ long-term commitment to the implementation of comprehensive VAW legislation and, therefore, the allocation of national funds to specialized policing for women. Second, our research demonstrates the importance of increasing WPS’ coverage and improving the quality of their services. Widespread implementation of WPS maximizes the chances of significant shifts in men’s attitudes toward VAW across territories and, consequently, the reduction of VAW at the national level. The provision of high-quality services is quintessential for reinforcing social norms supportive of bystander intervention and consequently promoting collective action against gender-based violence.



