
antigen immunogenicity 
Graphical abstract 
Unlabelled image
Highlights d Size and solubility of microbial ligands determine the immune response 
d Fungal mannans are directly drained to the LN to drive cell accrual via interferon release 
d Tuning mannan physical properties broadens epitope speci.city of SARS-CoV-2 anti-Spike antibodies 
d An adjuvant formulation of mannan/alum induces heterosubtypic immunity against IAV 

Authors 
Francesco Borriello, Valentina Poli, Ellen Shrock, ..., Hidde L. Ploegh, David L. Williams, Ivan Zanoni 

Correspondence 
ivan.zanoni@childrens.harvard.edu 



In brief 
The physical properties of fungal mannans determine their immunological activity, and modulating their physical form improves the adjuvant properties of these immune stimuli when included in vaccine formulations directed against respiratory viruses. 

Borriello et al., 2022, Cell 185, 614每629 February 17, 2022 a 2022 Elsevier Inc. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.009 


ll 





Article 



An adjuvant strategy enabled by modulation of the physical properties of microbial ligands expands antigen immunogenicity 
Francesco Borriello,1,2,3,20 
Valentina Poli,1,2 
Ellen Shrock,1,4 
Roberto Sprea.co,5 
Xin Liu,1,6 
Novalia Pishesha,1,6 
Claire Carpenet,1,6 
Janet Chou,1,2 
Marco Di Gioia,1,2 
Marisa E. McGrath,7 
Carly A. Dillen,7 
Nora A. Barrett,1,8 
Lucrezia Lacanfora,1,2,9 
Marcella E. Franco,1,2,9 
Laura Marongiu,9 
Yoichiro Iwakura,10 
Ferdinando Pucci,11 
Michael D. Kruppa,12 
Zuchao Ma,13 
Douglas W. Lowman,13 
Harry E. Ensley,13 
Etsuro Nanishi,1,14 
Yoshine Saito,14 
Timothy R. O＊Meara,14 
Hyuk-Soo Seo,1,15 
Sirano Dhe-Paganon,1,15 
David J. Dowling,1,14 
Matthew Frieman,7 
Stephen J. Elledge,1,4 
Ofer Levy,1,14,16 
Darrell J. Irvine,17,18 
Hidde L. Ploegh,1,6 
David L. Williams,12 
and Ivan Zanoni1,2,19,21,22,* 

1Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA 2Boston Children＊s Hospital, Division of Immunology, Boston, MA, USA 3Department of Translational Medical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women＊s Hospital, Program in Virology, Boston, MA, USA 5Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA 6Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children＊s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 7University of Maryland School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baltimore, MD, USA 8Brigham and Women＊s Hospital, Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Boston, MA, USA 9Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano〞Bicocca, Milan, Italy 10Center for Animal Disease Models, Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo, Japan 11Department of Otolaryngology〞Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA 12Department of Biomedical Sciences, Quillen College of Medicine, Center of Excellence in Infammation, Infectious Disease and Immunity, East Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN, USA 13Department of Surgery, Quillen College of Medicine, Center of Excellence in Infammation, Infectious Disease and Immunity, East Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN, USA 14Boston Children＊s Hospital, Precision Vaccines Program, Boston, MA, USA 15Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Cancer Biology, Boston, MA, USA 16Broad Institute of MIT & Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA 17Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Biological Engineering and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA 18Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA 19Boston Children＊s Hospital, Division of Gastroenterology, Boston, MA, USA 20Present address: Generate Biomedicines, Cambridge, MA, USA 21Twitter: @Lo_Zanzi 22Lead contact *Correspondence: ivan.zanoni@childrens.harvard.edu 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.009 
SUMMARY 

Activation of the innate immune system via pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) is key to generate lasting adaptive immunity. PRRs detect unique chemical patterns associated with invading microorganisms, but whether and how the physical properties of PRR ligands in.uence the development of the immune response remains unknown. Through the study of fungal mannans, we show that the physical form of PRR ligands dictates the immune response. Soluble mannans are immunosilent in the periphery but elicit a potent pro-in.ammatory response in the draining lymph node (dLN). By modulating the physical form of mannans, we developed a formulation that targets both the periphery and the dLN. When combined with viral glycoprotein antigens, this mannan formulation broadens epitope recognition, elicits potent antigen-speci.c neutralizing antibodies, and confers protection against viral infections of the lung. Thus, the phys-ical properties of microbial ligands determine the outcome of the immune response and can be harnessed for vaccine development. 

Article 
INTRODUCTION 
The dialogue between the innate and adaptive branches of the immune system is critical for protection against infections, as well as the pathogenesis of autoimmune, allergic, and infam-matory diseases (Banchereau and Steinman, 1998; Iwasaki and Medzhitov, 2004; Janeway and Medzhitov, 2002; Mat-zinger, 1994). Peripheral tissue infection and/or damage leads to the activation and migration of innate immune phagocytes to the draining lymph node (dLN), where they initiate an anti-gen-dependent adaptive immune response. Alternatively, innate stimuli or microbes with specifc physical properties (e.g., diameter in the nanometer range) can directly drain to the dLN and activate the lymph node (LN)-resident innate and adaptive immune cells (Bachmann and Jennings, 2010; Ir-
vine et al., 2020). The dLN has been thoroughly scrutinized for its capacity to host adaptive immune responses, but recent reports indicate that the antigen-dependent adaptive immune response is preceded and supported by an antigen-indepen-dent LN innate response (Acton et al., 2014; Coccia et al., 2017; De Giovanni et al., 2020; Didierlaurent et al., 2014; Kas-
tenmu“ ller et al., 2012; Leal et al., 2021; Lian et al., 2020; Lynn et al., 2015; Mart.∩n-Fontecha et al., 2004; Soderberg et al., 2005; Wong et al., 2018, 2019; Xu et al., 2015b). The LN innate response allows antigen-independent LN expansion, estab-lishment of a pro-infammatory milieu, and the development of an effective adaptive immune response (Acton and Reis e Sousa, 2016; Grant et al., 2020). It remainsa mysterywhether and how the LN innate response may differ when it is driven by the migration of phagocytes from the periphery, as opposed to when it is governed by the direct targeting of LN-resident innate immune cells. 
Innate immune cells recognize pathogen-associated molecu-lar patterns (PAMPs) (Janeway and Medzhitov, 2002) via pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) (Brubaker et al., 2015). PRR activa-tion is critical for triggering infammation and for the ensuing development of adaptive immune responses. For this reason, targeting of PRRs has been harnessed for vaccine development (O＊Hagan et al., 2020). Among PRRs, the biology of C-type lectin receptors (CLRs) and their potential as vaccine adjuvant targets have been less investigated. 
CLRs control innate and adaptive immune responses to fungal infection through recognition of cell wall polysaccha-rides (Borriello et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2018). The CLRs Dectin-1 (Clec7a)and Dectin-2 (Clec4n)are activatedby b-glucans and mannans, respectively. These fungal polysac-charides vary not only by chemical structure but also by physical form (e.g., size and solubility). Dectin-1 and Dectin-2 bind fungal polysaccharides in soluble, as well as insoluble forms, but only the latter induces effcient receptor clustering and activation (Goodridge et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2013). Consequently, it is widely held that only particulate polysac-charides are immuno-stimulatory. In this study, we re-exam-ined this paradigm and show that the quality of LN innate and adaptive immune responses can be tuned by modulating the physical properties of fungal ligands, providing a promising approach for adjuvant design and vaccine development. 


RESULTS 
Mannans elicit LN-restricted IFN signatures that drive LN expansion 
We employed preparations of b-glucans and mannans isolated from Candida albicans that exhibit distinct physical forms, being insoluble (with a diameter of 500 nm) and soluble (with a diam-eter of 20 nm) (Figure S1A). Particulate b-glucans, but not soluble mannans, elicited cytokine production and expression of co-stimulatory molecules by phagocytes in vitro (Figure S1B). As expected, signaling by b-glucans required Dectin-1 (Fig-
ure S1C). In contrast to soluble mannans, immobilization of mannans onto microbeads resulted in Dectin-2-and FcRg-dependent activation of phagocytes (Figure S1C, lipopolysac-charide (LPS) and curdlan were used as controls). Accordingly, b-glucans elicited formation of skin abscesses and lesions upon in vivo intradermal injection, whereas mannans did not (Fig-
ure 1A). These results were confrmed by transcriptomic analysis of skin samples (Figure 1B; Table S1). Pathway analysis of the cluster of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) upregulated by b-glucans showed enrichment for pro-infammatory and type II interferon (IFN) pathways, consistent with the response elicited by C. albicans skin infection (Figure S1D) (Santus et al., 2017). While soluble mannans did not induce skin infammation, these fungal ligands induced dLN expansion and lymphocyte accrual as early as 6 h post-injection (h.p.i.), which was sustained at 24 
h.p.i. (Figure 1C; Figures S2A每S2C) and dependent on circulating leukocyte recruitment (Figure 1D). b-glucans also elicited LN expansion but only at 24 h.p.i. (Figure 1C; Figures S2A每S2C). Both fungal ligands increased the numbers of myeloid cells in the dLN (Figures S2D每S2G), with b-glucans preferentially increasing neutrophils, possibly refecting drainage from the skin (Figure S2D). However, only mannans induced the activation of myeloid cells, as measured by increased CD86 expression (Figure S2H). Considering the fast response and the diameter compatible with lymphatic drainage, we reasoned that mannans might activate LN-intrinsic circuits that eventually lead to dLN expansion. In keeping with this hypothesis, mannans rapidly accumulated in the dLN of wild-type (WT) and Ccr7/ mice in which migration of immune cells from the periphery (i.e., skin) to the dLNs is abolished (Figure 1E) (Ohl et al., 2004). Accordingly, mannans induced dLN expansion even in Ccr7/ mice (Figure 1F) A transcriptomic analysis of dLNs showed a completely opposite profle compared with the skin, with mannans eliciting an earlier and more pronounced response than b-glucans (Fig-
ure 1G; Table S2). Pathway analysis showed that mannans upre-gulated type I and II IFN pathways (Figures 1H and 1I). 
The presence of type II IFN (IFNg)-producing cells in mannan-treated dLN was confrmed by fow cytometry (Figure S2I). The majority of IFNg-producing cells were CD8+ T and NK cells (Fig-
ure S2J), with NK cells expressing IFNg at higher levels (Fig-
ure S2K). When NK cells were depleted, expression of Ifng was impaired (Figure S2L). Type 1 conventional dendritic cells (cDC1s) produce cytokines that induce NK cell activation and IFNg production (Cancel et al., 2019) and may therefore contribute to the response induced by mannans. Nevertheless, Batf3/ mice that lack cDC1s showed no impairment of mannan-elicited Ifng expression (Figure S2M). Notably, NK cell 
ll 
AB

CD 

Article 
F
EGH 
I 
J 
K 

Figure 1. Mannans elicit lymph node-restricted IFN signatures that drive lymph node expansion 
(A) 
Mice were injected intradermally with saline (Sal), mannans (Mann), or b-glucans (b-gluc). 24 h later the injection site was assessed for the presence of an abscess, with or without skin lesion. The graph depicts percentages of mice in each of the indicated categories. Representative pictures of skin appearance at injection sites of saline, mannans, and b-glucans are also shown. N = 5 mice per group. 

(B) 
Transcriptomic analysis of skin samples collected 6 h after injection of saline (Sal), b-glucans (b-gluc), or mannans (Mann). Heatmap of abundance (z-scored log2 normalized counts) of genes induced by b-glucans and/or mannans compared with saline control, ranked by abundance difference between b-glucans and 


(legend continued on next page) 


ll 

Article 


depletion only partially affected LN expansion and cell accrual (Figure S2N). In keeping with this, IFNg blockade only partially reduced the mannan-induced expansion of LN (Figure 1J). We, therefore, tested whether the absence of both IFNg and type I IFN signaling impacted the LN innate response. Simultaneous blockade of both IFN types prevented mannan-elicited LN expansion and the induction of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) (Figure 1J). This mechanism was not restricted to man-nans, since LN expansion and the induction of ISGs elicited by Lipo-CpG, a well characterized LN-targeted Toll-like receptor (TLR)9 ligand (Liu et al., 2014), were also impaired in Ifnar/ Ifngr/ mice (Figure 1K). To further establish whether these differences were due to the distinct physical forms of fungal polysaccharides, we evaluated the response to whole glucan particles (WGP) in dispersible (D) or soluble (S) forms, which have been characterized as Dectin-1 agonists and antagonists, respectively (Goodridge et al., 2011). Consistent with the pattern observed in mannans, WGP-S did not induce skin infammation (Figure S3A) but elicited LN expansion and ISG expression (Fig-
ure S3B). Altogether, these results support a model in which the physical form of PAMPs drives dLN expansion and ISG induction. 
Mannan-elicited LN innate response requires Dectin-2-expressing CD169+ sinus macrophages 
We found that Dectin-2, the major receptor for mannans (Bor-
riello et al., 2020; Lionakis et al., 2017; Netea et al., 2008) and its co-receptor FcRg were required for mannan-elicited LN expansion and ISG induction (Figure 2A). We employed fuores-cently labeled mannans and found that mannan-laden cells were CD45+ cells (Figure 2B). Imaging cytometry analysis confrmed that these cells internalized mannans (Figure 2C), and confocal microscopy analysis showed colocalization of phospho-Syk and mannans (Figure 2D), indicative of Dectin-2 and FcRg-medi-ated activation. Accordingly, mannan-laden cells showed the highest levels of expression of CD86 in an FcRg-dependent manner (Figure 2E). We found that more than 50% of mannan-laden cells were Ly6G (CD11b+ Ly6C+) CD11c+ cells, while less abundant cell subsets were neutrophils (CD11b+ Ly6G+) and monocytes (-derived) cells (MoCs, Ly6G CD11b+ Ly6C+) (Figure 2F). The depletion of CD11c+ cells, but not the inhibition of monocyte egress from the bone marrow or the depletion of neutrophils, abolished the mannan-elicited LN innate response (Figure 2G每2I). CD11c+ cells can be further distinguished based on the expression of CD11b (Figure 2F). Since Dectin-2 is critical for mannan-elicited LN innate response, we assessed its expres-sion on CD11b CD11c+ and CD11b+ CD11c+ cells at steady state. Dectin-2 was expressed mainly by CD11b+ CD11c+ cells (Figure 2J). The majority of CD11b+ CD11c+ Dectin-2+ cells ex-pressed the subcapsular and medullary sinus macrophage marker CD169 (Figure 2K). Confocal microscopy analysis confrmed the colocalization of CD169 and Dectin-2 on cells lining the LN subcapsular sinus (Figure 2L). Furthermore, DT-mediated depletion of CD169+ cells in CD169-DTR mice phe-nocopied the results obtained with CD11c-DTR mice and completely abolished mannan-elicited LN expansion and ISG in-duction (Figure 2M). These results are consistent with a role for CD169+ sinus macrophages as sentinels of lymph-borne mate-rials (Moran et al., 2019). 
Activation of the non-canonical NF-kB subunit RelB governs mannan-elicited LN innate responses 
CARD9 is the major signaling adaptor of Dectins (Brubaker et al., 2015), but the mannan-elicited LN expansion was comparable between WT and Card9/ mice (Figure 3A). In keeping with this, the induction of ISGs was largely maintained in Card9/ mice (Figure 3A). In particular, type I IFN-dependent genes were unchanged in Card9/ compared with WT mice, while type II IFN-dependent ISGs, although signifcantly decreased compared with WT mice, were still partially induced (Figure 3A). Next, we 

mannans. The gap splits the genes into two clusters, one that is highly upregulated by b-glucans and one that is highly upregulated by mannans. N = 3 mice per group. 
(C) 
Mice were injected intradermally with saline, mannans (Mann), or b-glucans (b-gluc). 6 or 24 h later dLNs were collected and analyzed for weight as well as absolute numbers of CD45+, B, and T cells. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected LN. N = 5每9 mice per group. 

(D) 
Mice were injected intravenously with a blocking anti-CD62L antibody (aCD62L) or the same dose of an isotype control (Iso CTRL) one day before intradermal injections of saline or mannans. 24 h later, dLNs were collected and their weights measured. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected LN. N = 4 mice per group. 

(E) 
WT and Ccr7/ mice were intradermally injected with saline (Sal) or fuorescently labeled mannans (Mann). 1, 6, and 24 h later dLNs were collected and homogenized to measure total fuorescence. Results are expressed as arbitrary units (A.U.) of fuorescence and shown as mean + SEM. N = 3 mice per timepoint. 

(F) 
Ccr7/ mice were injected intradermally with saline or mannans. 24 h later dLNs were collected and analyzed as indicated in (C). N = 6 mice. 

(G) 
Transcriptomic analysis of dLNs collected 6 and 24 h after intradermal injection of saline (Sal), b-glucans (b-gluc), or mannans (Mann). Heatmap of abundance (z-scored log2 normalized counts) of genes induced by b-glucans and/or mannans compared with saline control, ranked by abundance difference between b-glucans and mannans. The gap splits the genes into two clusters, one that is highly upregulated by b-glucans and one that is highly upregulated by mannans. N = 4每5 mice per group. 

(H) 
Pathway enrichment analysis of genes belonging to the cluster upregulated by mannans as depicted in (G). 

(I) 
Heatmap representation of the average expression levels of the top 50 genes upregulated in mannan-treated dLNs 24 h after the injection compared with the saline control. N = 4每5 mice per group. 

(J) 
WT and Ifnar/ mice were intravenously injected with an anti-IFNg blocking antibody (aIFNg) or the same dose of an isotype control (Iso CTRL) on day 1 and 


0. On day 0, mice were also intradermally injected with saline (Sal) or mannans (Mann). 24 h later dLNs were collected, their weights measured, and RNA extracted for gene expression analysis. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected LN (weight), or as relative expression compared with Gapdh.N=4 mice per group. 
(K) WT and Ifnar/ Ifngr/ mice were intradermally injected with saline (Sal) or Lipo-CpG. Samples were collected and analyzed as in (J). N = 5 mice per group. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing each group against the value 1 (which represent the contralateral control sample expressed as fold). * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing different experimental groups. See also Figures S1, S2, S3 and Tables S1 and S2. 
ll 

AB 

Article 
CDE 
F 
G 

HI 
JKLM 
Figure 2. Mannan-elicited lymph node innate response requires Dectin-2-expressing, CD169+ sinus macrophages 
(A) WT, Clec4n/ and Fcer1g/ mice were intradermally injected with saline or mannans. 24 h later dLNs were collected, their weights were measured, and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected LN. N = 3每5 mice per genotype. 
(legend continued on next page) 


ll 

Article 


performed a targeted transcriptomic analysis of mannan-laden CD11b+ CD11c+ cells isolated from WT, Fcer1g/, and Card9/ mice. While several genes were differentially expressed between WT (or Card9/) and Fcer1g/ mice, cells isolated from WT and Card9/ mice exhibited strikingly similar transcriptomes (Fig-
ure 3B; Tables S3每S7). Pathway enrichment analysis showed that DEGs between cells isolated from WT and Fcer1g/ mice were represented in TNF/NF-kB, type I and II IFN pathways (Fig-
ure S4). Downstream of Dectin-2, Syk activates the kinase NIK, which in turn leads to CARD9-independent activation of the non-canonical NF-kB transcription factor RelB (Gringhuis et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2018). We, therefore, generated mice in which RelB was conditionally deleted in the CD11c+ compartment (Cd11ccre Relb./.). Mannan-induced LN expansion and expres-sion of both type I and type II IFN-dependent ISGs were signif-cantly reduced compared with control (Relb./.) mice (Figure 3C). Similar resultswere obtained when Lipo-CpG was employed (Fig-
ure 3D). These results support a model in which RelB regulates optimal IFN-dependent ISG expression elicited by LN-targeted stimuli to sustain LN expansion. 
Molecular pathways required for mannan-elicited LN innate response regulate the magnitude of mannan adjuvant activity 
We reasoned that lymphocyte accrual and IFN signatures induced by mannan may favor the encounter of T cells with their cognate antigen and its effcient presentation by the innate im-mune compartment, thereby improving the adaptive immune response. We employed a model of adoptive transfer of CFSE-labeled, ovalbumin (OVA)-specifc OT-I CD8+ and OT-II CD4+ T cells to assess the modulation of T cell proliferation (Figures 4A每4H). Combining mannans with OVA resulted in a strong in-crease in the numbers of OT-I and OT-II cells in the dLN compared with the mice injected with saline or OVA alone (Fig-
ures 4A and 4E). This increase was likely due to the improved T cell recruitment to the dLN and more effcient antigen presen-tation/co-stimulation by LN-resident innate immune cells. Indeed, we detected a lower percentage of non-proliferating T cells, as well as a higher percentage of T cells undergoing 6 or 7 divisions in mice treated with OVA and mannans compared with OVA alone (Figures 4B and 4F). Of note, the effect of man-nans on T cell proliferation was abrogated in Fcer1g/ mice, while it was only attenuated in Card9/ mice (Figures 4C, 4D, 4G, and 4H). These results show that pathways required for the mannan-elicited LN innate response are also critical for the adjuvant activity of mannans on antigen-specifc adaptive im-mune responses. 
Mannans formulated with aluminum hydroxide acquire physical properties that predict immunological functions 
To further modulate the physical properties of mannans, we ex-ploited the presence of phosphate groups of mannans to pro-mote adsorption onto aluminum hydroxide (hereafter alum), as shown for other molecules (Morefeld et al., 2005; Moyer et al., 2020). By 1H-NMR, we found that alum adsorbed 40% of man-nans, with the remainder staying soluble (Figure S5A). We also quantifed alum-bound mannans at approximately twice its mass in the formulation used in these experiments. 
In vitro experiments showed that the formulation of mannans with alum, but not alum or mannans alone, induced cytokine pro-duction in a Dectin-2-and CARD9-dependent manner (Figures S5B and S5C), while the expression of co-stimulatory molecules was Dectin-2-dependent but CARD9-independent (Figures S5D and S5E). Finally, mannans formulated or not with alum, but not alum alone, induced ISG expression in a Dectin-2-dependent but CARD9-independent manner, except for CXCL1 that was signifcantly upregulated only in response to mannans formu-lated with alum in WT cells (Figure S5F每S5I). 
When injected into mice, mannans formulated with alum not only elicited skin infammation (Figure 5A) but also drained to the LN in a CCR7-independent manner (Figure 5B). Mannans formu-lated with alum induced over time a higher LN expansion compared with alum, mannans, or b-glucans (Figure 5C). Moreover, mannans alone or in combination with alum elicited comparable ISG expression in the dLN (Figure 5D). As expected, b-glucans induced LN expansion but were largely excluded from the LN and did not induce expression of ISG (Figures 5B每5D). 

(B) 
WT mice were intradermally injected with fuorescently labeled mannans (Mann-AF488). 6 h later dLNs were collected and the absolute numbers of mannan-laden (Mann+) CD3/CD19/NK1.1 cells were quantifed by fow cytometry. N = 6 mice. 

(C) 
Mice were treated as in (B). Imaging cytometry analysis and quantifcation of mannan internalization was performed on CD3/CD19/NK1.1-depeted, CD45+ mannan-laden (Mann+) cells. N = 4 mice. 

(D) 
WT mice were intradermally injected with fuorescently labeled mannans (Mann). 1 h later dLNs were collected for confocal microscopy analysis using an-tibodies against B220 and phospho-Syk (pSyk). DAPI was used for nuclear counterstaining. One representative image is shown. 

(E) 
WT and Fcer1g/ mice were injected with saline or fuorescently labeled mannans. 6 h later dLNs were collected and CD86 expression levels were assessed by fow cytometry on CD3/CD19/NK1.1 CD45+ mannan-laden (Mann+) cells, CD45+ cells that did not capture mannans (Mann), and CD45+ cells from saline-injected dLNs (Sal). N = 6 mice per genotype. 

(F) 
WT mice were intradermally injected with fuorescently labeled mannans. 6 h later dLNs were collected and the phenotype of CD3/CD19/NK1.1 CD45+ mannan-laden (Mann+) cells was assessed by fow cytometry. N = 6 mice. (G每I) Diphtheria toxin (DT)-treated CD11c-DT receptor (DTR), Ccr2/ and isotype control (Iso CTRL)-or anti-Ly6G (aLy6G)-treated mice were treated and analyzed as in (A). N = 4 mice per group. (J and K) LNs were isolated from untreated WT mice and the expression of Dectin-2 was evaluated by fow cytometry as a percentage of expression in the indicated CD3/CD19/NK1.1 CD45+ cell subsets. N = 6 for (J) or 3 for (K). 

(L) 
Confocal microscopy analysis of untreated LNs stained with antibodies against Dectin-2, B220, and CD169. DAPI was used for nuclear counterstaining. One representative image is shown. 

(M) 
DT-treated CD169-DTR mice were treated and analyzed as in (A). N = 4 mice per group. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing each group against the value 1 (which represent the contralateral control sample expressed as fold) or saline control. * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 


0.01 when comparing among different experimental groups. 





Article 
AB 

CD 


Figure 3. Activation of the non-canonical NF-kB subunit RelB governs the mannan-elicited lymph node innate response 
(A) 
WT and Card9/ mice were treated and analyzed as in Figure 2A. N = 9 (for LN weight) or 4 (for gene expression analysis) mice per genotype. 

(B) 
CD3 CD19 NK1.1 Ter119 CD45+ AF488-mannan+ Ly6G (CD11b+ Ly6C+) CD11b+ CD11c+ cells were sorted from dLNs of WT, Fcer1g/, and Card9/ mice 6 h after AF488-mannan injection and transcriptional profles were assessed by targeted transcriptome sequencing. Results are shown as heatmap of genes with an F-test FDR less than 0.05 and a log2 fold-change (FC) greater than 1 (or lower than 1) between a knockout mouse and WT control. (C and D) Relb./. and Cd11ccre Relb./. mice were treated with saline, mannans, or Lipo-CpG, and analyzed as in Figure 2A. N = 4每13 mice per genotype. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing each group against the value 1 (which represent the contralateral control sample expressed as fold) or saline control. * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing different experimental groups. See also Figure S4 and Tables S3每S7. 


LN expansion induced by mannans formulated with alum, but not b-glucans, was impaired in Ifnar/ mice treated with an anti-IFNg blocking antibody (Figure 5E). Similar results were obtained when IFN production was transiently blocked by treating WT mice with anti-IFNAR and anti-IFNg blocking antibodies (Figure 5F). Overall, these results are compatible with a model in which the particulate fraction (mannans adsorbed onto alum) promotes skin infamma-tion,while thesolublefraction(unboundmannans)drainstotheLN and induces the ISG expression. Side by side injections of mice with either particulate or soluble fractions of mannans formulated with alum validated this model (Figure 5G, H). Finally, weassessed whether the LN innate response induced by mannans formulated with alum exploits the same cellular and molecular mechanisms of mannans or whether the immunomodulatory functions of alum (Ei-
senbarth et al., 2008) completely rewired these requirements. We found that LN expansion and ISG induction were impaired in Clec4n/ and Fcer1g/ mice (Figure 5I). In addition, Ifng expres-sion in the dLN was reduced when NK cells were depleted (Fig-
ure 5J) and preserved in Batf3/ mice lacking cDC1 (Figure 5K). Overall, formulation with alum endows mannans with enhanced immunological functions that can be predicted based on their physical properties (i.e., particulate versus soluble) and refects triggering of mannan-dependent Dectin-2-activated pathways. 

Immunization with SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein and mannans formulated with alum generates anti-Spike type 1 immunity and neutralizing antibodies with broad epitope speci.city 

To investigate adjuvant activities of mannans in an immunization model of translational relevance, we used the pre-fusion 


ll 

Article 



AB CD 

EF GH 

Figure 4. Molecular pathways required for mannan-elicited lymph node innate response regulate the magnitude of mannan adjuvant activity 
(A每H) CFSE-labeled OT-I CD8+ T or OT-II CD4+ T cells were injected intravenously in WT mice on day 1. On day 0, the mice were intradermally injected with saline, ovalbumin (OVA), or OVA combined with mannans (OVA + mann). Three days later dLNs were isolated and the absolute numbers of CFSElo cells (i.e., cells that underwent at least one cycle of cell division) (A, E) or the percentages of cells in each division peak (B, F) were quantifed by fow cytometry. N = 4 mice per group. ## indicates p %0.01 when comparing each group against saline control (A, E). * and **, respectively, indicate p %0.05 and p % 0.01 when comparing OVA versus OVA + mann. (A, B, E, and F). (C, D, G, and H) WT, Fcer1g/ , and Card9/ mice were treated and analyzed as in (A), (B), (E), and (F) (with the exception that all mice received OVA combined with mannans). N = 4 mice per genotype. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and p % 0.01 when comparing WT versus Fcer1g/ (black) or Card9/ versus Fcer1g/ (blue). * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing WT versus Card9/ . Results in (B, F) and (D, H) are shown as mean + SD. 
stabilized SARS-CoV-2 Spike trimer (hereafter Spike) (Corbett et al., 2020; Jackson et al., 2020; Keech et al., 2020; Mercado et al., 2020; Walls et al., 2020; Walsh et al., 2020; Wrapp et al., 2020). We immunized mice with Spike alone or with Spike ad-mixed with alum, b-glucans, or mannans that are either formu-lated or not with alum, with a prime-boost schedule. Mannans formulated with alum induced the highest levels of anti-Spike or anti-receptor binding domain (RBD) antibodies (Figures 6A and 6B). Type-1 immunity has been associated with reduced risk of vaccine-associated enhanced respiratory disease upon viral infection (Graham, 2020), and mannans formulated with alum promoted anti-Spike type-1 immunity by inducing anti-Spike IgG2c and antigen-specifc T cells skewed toward IFNg production (Figures 6A每6C). Elevated levels of anti-Spike IgG1 and IgG2c were maintained for up to 98 days post immunization (Figures S6A and S6B). Next, we performed a surrogate virus neutralization test and an actual SARS-CoV-2 neutralization test and found that mice immunized with Spike and mannans formulated with alum showed the highest degree of neutraliza-tion (Figures 6D and 6E). We also assessed whether there were spatial and temporal constraints to the adjuvant effect of mannans formulated with alum. Mice were injected with Spike and mannans formulated with alum at the same site, or with Spike formulated with alum at one injection site and with man-nans at an adjacent site, either on the same day or on the next day. An enhanced antibody response was observed only when Spike was admixed with mannans formulated with alum (Figures 6F and 6G). In contrast to B cell responses, IFNg production by antigen-specifc T cells was observed in mice immunized with alum and mannans, regardless of when and where mannans were injected (Figure 6H). 
B and T cell responses induced by mannans formulated with alum were abrogated in Clec4n/ mice (Figures S6C and S6D) but only partially impaired in Card9/ mice (Figures S6E and S6F). Immunization of Cd11ccre Relb./. or Ifnar/ Ifngr/ mice, as well as of WT mice in which IFN signaling was transiently abrogated during the immunization phase by administration of anti-IFNAR and anti-IFNg antibodies, all showed impairment in the anti-Spike IgG response (Figures S6G每S6I). Finally, we found that cDC1s were also required, as assessed by impaired IgG production in Batf3/ mice (Figure S6J). 
To determine the Spike epitopes targeted by antibodies elicited by the different adjuvant formulations tested above, we performed a VirScan analysis (Shrock et al., 2020; 
ll 

ABC D 


Article 
FH
EG 

IJK 
Figure 5. Formulation of mannans with aluminum hydroxide confers physical properties that predict immunological functions 
(A) 
Mice were intradermally injected with saline (Sal), alum (AH), b-glucans (b-gluc), mannans (Mann), or AH/mannans (AH/mann). 24 h later skin samples were collected, and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected skin sample. N = 4每5 mice per group. 

(B) 
WT mice were intradermally injected with saline (Sal), fuorescently labeled b-glucans (b-gluc), fuorescently labeled mannans (Mann), or their formulation with AH (AH/mann). In addition, Ccr7/ mice were intradermally injected with AH/mann. 24 h later dLNs were collected and homogenized to measure total fuo-rescence. Results are expressed as arbitrary units (A.U.) of fuorescence and shown as individual data points (horizontal bars represent means). N = 3 mice. 

(C) 
Mice were treated as in (A). 1, 7, and 14 days later dLNs were collected, their weights were measured and expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected LN. Results are represented as mean + SEM (left) or area under the curve (AUC, right). 

(D) 
Mice were treated as in A. 24 h later dLNs were collected, and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected LN. N = 5 per group. 

(E) 
Ifnar/ and WT mice were respectively treated with a blocking anti-IFNg antibody (aIFNg) or the same dose of an isotype control (Iso CTRL) on day 1 and 0, and on day 0 mice were intradermally injected with saline (Sal), b-glucans (b-gluc), or AH/mannans (AH/mann). 24 h later dLNs were collected and their weights were measured. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected LN. N = 5 mice per group. 

(F) 
WT mice were treated with blocking anti-IFNAR plus anti-IFNg (aIFNAR/IFNg) antibodies or the same doses of isotype controls (Iso CTRL) on day 1 and 0, and on day 0 mice were intradermally injected with saline (Sal) or AH/mannans (AH/mann). 24 h later dLNs were collected and their weights were measured. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected LN. N = 5 mice per group. (G and H) Mice were treated with the soluble (Sol) or particulate (Part) fractions of AH/mannans. 24 h later skin samples (G) and dLNs (H) were collected, dLN weights were measured, and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected skin sample, or LN. N = 5 mice per group. 

(I) 
Mice of the indicated backgrounds were injected with saline (Sal) or AH/mannans (AH/mann). 24 h later dLNs were collected, their weights were measured, and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis. Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, saline-injected sample, or as relative expression compared with Gapdh. (J and K) WT mice injected on day 1 and 0 with the same volumes of phosphate buffer saline (PBS) or a depleting anti-Asialo GM1 antibody (aAsGM1) (J), or WT and Batf3/ mice (K) were injected intradermally on day 0 with saline (Sal) or AH/mannans (AH/mann). 24 h later dLNs were collected, and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis. Results are reported as relative expression compared with Gapdh. N = 5 mice per group. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 


0.01 when comparing each group against its untreated control (CTRL) or the value 1 (which represent the contralateral control sample expressed as fold). * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing among different experimental groups. See also Figure S5. 
ll 


Article 
AB 
CD F
EGH 
Figure 6. Immunization with SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein and mannans formulated with alum generates anti-Spike type 1 immunity and neutralizing antibodies 
(A每E) Mice were injected intradermally with saline (Sal), pre-fusion stabilized SARS-CoV-2 Spike trimer alone (S) or combined with alum (AH) (S/AH), b-glucans (S/ b-gluc.), mannans (S/mann), or AH/mannans(S/AH/mann) on day 0 (prime) and day 14 (boost). Serum samples were collected on day 28 to assess anti-Spike (A) and anti-RBD (B) antibody levels, SARS-CoV-2 surrogate virus neutralization test (D) and neutralization titer (E). In selected experiments (C), mice were sacrifced on day 35 to collect spleens and isolate splenocytes for in vitro restimulation with Spike peptides. After 96 h supernatants were collected and IFNg protein levels were measured by ELISA. N = 16每18 (A and B), 10 (C), 8每10 (D), or 13每15 (E) mice per group. (F每H) Mice were injected intradermally with saline (Sal), pre-fusion stabilized SARS-CoV-2 Spike trimer alone (S) or combined with AH (S/AH). Mannans (Mann) were injected separately on the same side of the S/AH injection in a proximal site, either the same day (S/AH + Mann [D 0]) or the day before (S/AH + Mann [D 1]). As a control, SARS-CoV-2 trimer combined with AH and mannans (S/AH/Mann) was also injected. Formulations were injected on 
(legend continued on next page) 





Article 
Xu et al., 2015a). All formulations induced antibodies against the heptad repeat 2 region, but only mannans formulated with alum induced antibodies directed toward the fusion peptide and RBD (Figure 6I). This epitope-targeting profle was comparable for SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV Spike proteins. Notably, although fewer epitopes were recognized, the MERS Spike was also de-tected by antibodies elicited in mice immunized with SARS-CoV-2 Spike and mannans formulated with alum (Figure 6I). Alto-gether, our results show that mannan formulations enhance anti-Spike antibody levels and promote anti-Spike type 1 immunity, and that mannans formulated with alum are particularly effective at inducing anti-Spike neutralizing antibodies with broad epitope specifcity. 
The formulation of mannans and alum confers protection against viral infections of the lung 
Next, we benchmarked mannans formulated with alum against adjuvants that are part of FDA-approved vaccines: squalene-based oil-in-water nano-emulsions (AS03-like AddaS03 or MF59-like AddaVax) and the AS04-like formulation prepared by a simple admixture of alum and PHAD, a synthetic structural analog of the monophosphoryl lipid A (alum/PHAD). 
Immunization of mice with Spike and mannans formulated with alum, AddaS03, or alum/PHAD elicited comparable levels of anti-Spike and anti-RBD IgG antibodies (Figure 7A). Increased anti-Spike and anti-RBD antibodies correlated with increased neutralization capacity compared with alum alone (Figures S7A and S7B). When mice were infected with the mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 MA10 strain (Leist et al., 2020), we found markedly reduced viral lung titers in mice immunized with mannans formu-lated with alum, AddaS03, or alum/PHAD compared with saline-treated or alum-immunized mice (Figure 7B). 
The enhanced magnitude and breadth of the antigen-specifc antibody response elicited by mannans formulated with alum might be relevant for additional viral glycoproteins of high anti-genic variability, such as infuenza A virus (IAV) hemagglutinin (HA). IAV is characterized by many strains within multiple sero-types, generating high subtypic diversity (Sangesland and Ling-wood, 2021). We reasoned that the mannan formulation might not only promote a robust antibody response against target an-tigens but also heterosubtypic immunity upon infuenza vaccine immunization. We employed the clinically relevant recombinant HA (rHA) vaccine Flublok, and immunized mice with Flublok alone or Flublok formulated with alum, mannans formulated with alum, Addavax, or alum/PHAD. Anti-rHA antibodies were signifcantly increased in mice immunized with rHA and mannans formulated with alum, AddaVax, or alum/PHAD (Figure 7C). We then challenged the mice intranasally with the IAV strain A/PR/ 8/1934, whose HA is not part of the Flublok vaccine, and found that only mice previously immunized with Flublok and mannans formulated with alum were signifcantly protected. These results correlated with high IgG levels against recombinant HA derived from A/PR/8/1934 (rPR8) in mice immunized with Flublok and mannans formulated with alum, but not the other adjuvant for-mulations (Figures 7D每7F and S7D). 

Overall, these data show that the mannans formulated with alum enhance both magnitude and breadth of the antibody response against multiple viral glycoproteins in clinically relevant immunization models. 
DISCUSSION 

The activation of innate immune cells by PRR ligands is a critical step to initiate an adaptive immune response (Banchereau and Steinman, 1998; Iwasaki and Medzhitov, 2004; Janeway and Medzhitov, 2002; Matzinger, 1994). The study of cellular and mo-lecular events triggered by PRRs led to the identifcation of signaling organelles, metabolic pathways, and gene expression profles that shape the innate immune response (Brubaker et al., 2015). However, cell-intrinsic features of PRR activation and signaling alone do not explain the complexity of the in vivo in-fammatory response elicited by innate stimuli. Indeed, their localization at cellular and organismal levels plays a key role in determining the activation status of innate immune cells (Evavold and Kagan, 2019). 
The study of CLRs, and specifcally of Dectin-1 and -2, is of particular interest since only the particulate form of their ligands induces effcient receptor clustering and activation (Goodridge et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2013). In our study, we show that soluble mannans, while largely inactive in vitro and in vivo at the injection site, traffc to the LN due to their size and elicit a potent innate response, characterized by LN expansion and expression of type I and II IFN transcriptional programs. Remarkably, the re-sponses that we observed bypass the need for dendritic cell migration from the periphery to the dLN, and soluble mannans directly target CD169+ sinus macrophages. We further modu-lated the physical properties of mannans by adsorbing them onto alum to obtain formulations in which mannans are present in both soluble and particulate forms. We show that this formu-lation results in enhanced immunological properties, such as full activation of innate immune cells in vitro and simultaneous targeting of the periphery and the LN. When tested as an adju-vant system formulated with viral glycoprotein antigens (IAV HA or SARS-CoV-2 Spike), mannans enabled induction of neutralizing antibodies with broad epitope specifcity. Mannans formulated with alum protect against a SARS-CoV-2 MA10 chal-lenge to the same extent as adjuvants that resemble those included in licensed vaccines. Immunization of mice with 
day 0 (prime) and day 14 (boost). Serum samples were collected on day 28 to assess anti-Spike antibody levels (F) and SARS-CoV-2 neutralization titer (G). In selected experiments (H), mice were sacrifced on day 35 to collect spleens and isolate splenocytes for in vitro restimulation as in C. N = 6每8 mice per group. #, * and ##, **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing different experimental groups. Comparisons are indicated by the color code. 
(I) Mice were immunized as in (A每E). VirScan analysis was performed on serum samples collected on day 28. Each column represents a single serum sample collected from an individual mouse and each row represents a peptide tile. Tiles are labeled by amino acid start and end position. Color intensity represents the degree of enrichment (z-score) of each peptide. Color-coded lines indicate the approximate aminoacidic positions (AA pos.) of RBD, fusion peptides, and heptad repeat 2 of each virus. N = 6 mice per group. See also Figure S6. 





Article 

Figure 7. The adjuvant formulation of mannans and alum confers protection against lung viral infections 
(A and B) Mice were injected intradermally with saline (Sal), pre-fusion stabi-lized SARS-CoV-2 Spike trimer alone (S) or combined with alum (AH) (S/AH), AH/mannans (S/AH/mann), AddaS03 (S/AddaS03), or AH/PHAD (S/AH/PHAD) on day 0 (prime) and day 14 (boost). Serum samples were collected on day 28 to assess anti-Spike and anti-RBD antibody levels (A). On day 35, mice were intranasally infected with SARS-CoV-2 MA10, and 2 days later numbers of plaque-forming units (PFU) were quantifed in the lungs (B). N = 4每5 mice per group. (C每F) Mice were injected intradermally with saline (Sal), Flublok alone (rHA) or combined with AH (rHA/AH), AH/mannans (rHA/AH/mann), AddaVax (rHA/ AddaVax), or AH/PHAD (rHA/AH/PHAD) on day 0 (prime) and day 14 (boost). Serum samples were collected on day 28 to assess antibodies against rHA (anti-rHA, C) or IAV A/PR/8/1934 recombinant hemagglutinin (anti-rPR8, E). On day 35, mice were intranasally infected with IAV A/PR/8/1934, and body weights were recorded for 7 days (D). N = 5 (C, E) or 8 (D) mice per group. On day 7 post-infection, mice were sacrifced, and lungs were collected for his-tological analysis (hematoxylin eosin staining, F). One representative image per group is shown. #, * and ##, **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01. Comparisons are indicated by the color code. See also Figure S7. 
rHA-based Flublok vaccine formulated with alum and mannans elicited heterosubtypic immunity. Overall, our work sheds light on the molecular pathways activated by mannan formulations that trigger LN innate and adaptive responses and result in anti-body responses against viral glycoproteins of enhanced magni-tude and breadth. 
A key aspect of our work is the requirement for both type I and II IFNs to sustain mannan-induced lymphocyte accrual and LN expansion. Also, IFNs are necessary to potentiate the induction of antigen-specifc antibodies. IFNs act on both myeloid cells and LN stromal cells where they modulate a range of functions, including chemokine expression and vascular permeability (Bar-rat et al., 2019; Ivashkiv, 2018). Hence, our results raise the pos-sibility that mannan-elicited IFN signatures affect LN-resident myeloid and stromal compartments, eventually leading to poten-tiated adaptive immune responses. Our data on the augmented production and epitope specifcity of the anti-Spike antibody and data on the induction of cross-reactive anti-A/PR/8/1934 HA-an-tibodies suggest that the IFN signature driven by mannans formulated with alum broadens epitope recognition and potenti-ates protection against viruses. Nevertheless, in the future, it will be important to assess a possible ＆＆innate training＊＊ effect pro-moted by a more potent IFN response that may yield to cross-protective innate immunity. 
Mannans formulated with alum acquire remarkable new immunological properties. Although we cannot exclude synergy between alum and mannans, our results are more readily ex-plained by the concurrent presence in the formulation of man-nans unbound to alum and alum-adsorbed mannans. The former is responsible for ISG expression in the dLN, while the latter me-diates skin infammation. Evaluation of mannans formulated with alum in our immunization model with SARS-CoV-2 Spike sup-ports this model. Direct synergy between alum and mannan in-fammatory activity was excluded when alum and mannans were injected separately but in close physical proximity, an approach that led to a loss of the capacity of these adjuvants to enhance anti-Spike IgG. Such loss did not apply to T cell-mediated responses, which were boosted by the presence of mannans, independently of their coformulation with alum. Anal-ysis of soluble mannans that are either formulated or not with alum and admixed to Spike also showed that both formulations induce humoral and cellular type 1 immunity. Early induction of type I and II IFN signatures in the dLN is therefore suffcient to explain polarization of the adaptive immune response. Transient disruption of type I/II IFN signaling by administration of blocking antibodies signifcantly decreased levels of anti-Spike IgG, sug-gesting that early IFN signatures in the dLN translate into long-term potentiation of the immune response. 


A remarkable property of the formulation of mannans and alum is its ability to induce neutralizing anti-Spike antibodies with broad epitope specifcity. These antibodies cross-react with the SARS-CoV Spike and, to a lesser extent, the MERS Spike. The epitope specifcity profle observed in mice immunized with alum and mannans is comparable to that observed in COVID-19 patients, highlighting the translational relevance of our results (Shrock et al., 2020). Production of these antibodies has the same molecular and cellular requirements as the LN innate reaction induced by mannans formulated with alum, with the sole excep-tion of cDC1 that play an important role in driving the IgG response but not the LN innate response. Neutralizing antibodies are important for protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection in an-imal models (Cao et al., 2020; Hassan et al., 2020; Lv et al., 2020; McMahan et al., 2021; Rogers et al., 2020; Scha“ fer et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2020; Tortorici et al., 2020; Zost et al., 2020). Accord-ingly, mice immunized with Spike and mannans formulated with alum show undetectable lung viral titers after infection with SARS-CoV-2 MA10, similar to mice immunized with clinically relevant adjuvant formulations. We then employed a model of infuenza vaccination, using the clinically relevant Flublok vac-cine. While all adjuvants tested enhanced the antibody response to Flublok, only mannans formulated with alum induced hetero-subtypic immunity that was paralleled by detection of antibodies that cross-react against HA of A/PR/8/1934. It will be important in the future to clarify how the formulation of mannans and alum modulates germinal center dynamics and B cell repertoire selec-tion. From a translational perspective, the broadening of epitope specifcity suggests that mannans formulated with alum in combination with appropriate antigens might be a promising candidate for the development of vaccines that target multiple coronavirus or infuenza A strains. 
Overall, our study provides mechanistic and translational in-sights into how modulation of the physical form of mannans en-ables Dectin-2 targeting to enhance vaccine immunogenicity and protection, thereby illuminating the relationship between the physical form of innate stimuli and LN innate and adaptive immune responses. 
Limitations of the study 
Our study provides a detailed mechanistic analysis of mannan-induced LN innate response at the molecular and cellular level. We demonstrated that mannans alone or mannans admixed with alum require Dectin-2-expressing, CD169+ sinus macro-phages, but not cDC1s, neutrophils, or monocytes for LN expan-sion, while cDC1s are required to potentiate antibody production. It remains to be elucidated whether other immune cells, such as cDC2, may be involved in either the LN innate or adaptive 



Article 
response. Also, it will be important to unravel the possible rela-tionship between NK cells and DCs. Another unexpected fnding is the only partial requirement of CARD9, the key signaling adaptor downstream of Dectins (Borriello et al., 2020; Brubaker et al., 2015). CARD9-independent pathways downstream of Dec-tins have also been described, including NIK-dependent activa-tion of the non-canonical NFkB subunits p52 and RelB (Gringhuis et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2018). Mice that lack NIK, p52, or RelB have profound defects in secondary lymphoid organ development (Sun, 2017). Our results show that RelB activation in CD11c-ex-pressing cells regulates mannan-induced LN expansion and expression of type I IFN-dependent ISGs and cooperates with CARD9 in modulating the expression of type II IFN-dependent ISGs. Although the role of RelB in modulating IFN responses and ISG expression is ambiguous (Le Bon et al., 2006; Saha et al., 2020), and more studies will be required to decipher its role upon mannan encounter, our fndings create an intriguing parallelism between LN development and the innate response, setting the stage for RelB as a central regulator of the biology of secondary lymphoid organs. 
STAR+METHODS 

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: 
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE 
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY 
B Lead contact 
B Materials availability 
B Data and code availability 
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS 
B Mice 
B Cell lines 
B Viruses 
B Yeasts 
d METHOD DETAILS 
B Reagents and antibodies 
B Isolation of mannan from C. albicans 

B Preparation of the diaminopropane (DAP) derivatized 
mannan 
B Preparation of Candida albicans b-glucan particles 

B Preparation of the diaminopropane (DAP) derivatized 
b-glucan 

B Quantifcation of mannans in the alum/mannans 
formulation 
B Analysis of skin and LN responses 

B In vitro stimulation of GM-CSF-differentiated, bone 
marrow-derived phagocytes 

B In vivo quantifcation of fuorescently labelled b-glu-
cans and mannans 

B Flow cytometry, fuorescence-activated cell sorting 
(FACS), imaging cytometry and confocal microscopy 
B RNA isolation, qPCR, transcriptomic and pathway 
analyses 
B In vivo CD4+ and CD8+ T cell proliferation assay 

B SARS-CoV-2 Spike and RBD expression and 
purifcation 



Article 
B Immunization and antibody quantifcation 
B Splenocyte restimulation assay 
B SARS-CoV-2 surrogate virus neutralization tests 
B SARS-CoV-2 Neutralization Titer Determination 
B VirScan 
B SARS-CoV-2 challenge and lung viral titer 
determination 
B SARS-CoV-2 Plaque Assay 
B Infuenza A virus challenge and lung pathology 
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 2022.01.009. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I.Z. is supported by NIH grants 1R01AI121066, 1R01DK115217, 1R01AI165505 and contract no. 75N93019C00044, Lloyd J. Old STAR Pro-gram CRI3888 and holds an Investigators in the Pathogenesis of Infectious Disease Award from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund. D.J.D. is supported by NIH grant 1R21AI137932-01A1 and contract nos. 75N93019C00044 and 75N93020C00038. S.J.E. is funded by grants from the Value of Vaccine Research Network and the MassCPR. M.D.K. is supported by NIH grant R21 1R21AI159877. D.L.W. is supported by NIH grants 1R01GM119197, 1R01GM083016, and C06RR0306551. E.S. is funded by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program. S.J.E. is an investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. M.F. is supported by NIH grants R01 AI148166, R21AI153480, DARPA HR0011-20-2-0040, and DHS/BARDA ASPR-20-01495. We thank Drs. Barney S. Graham (NIH Vaccine Research Center) and Aaron G. Schmidt (Ragon Institute) for providing plasmids for pre-fusion stabilized SARS-CoV-2 Spike trimer and RBD, respectively. R.S. thanks the UCLA Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences (QCBio) Col-laboratory community directed by Matteo Pellegrini. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
F.B. conceived, designed, performed, analyzed the experiments, and wrote the manuscript; V.P. performed and designed in vitro and in vivo experiments; 
R.S. performed the analysis of the sequencing data; J.C. contributed to the design of the sequencing analysis; N.A.B. provided Clec4n mice and dis-cussed experiments; M.D.G., L.L., M.E.F., and L.M. participated in the analysis of in vitro data; S.D.-P. and H.-S.S. provided SARS-CoV-2 Spike and RBD; E.N., Y.S., T.R.O., D.J.D., O.L., N.P., X.L., C.C., and H.L.P. participated in im-munization experiments and edited the manuscript; Y.I. provided Clec4n mice; 
F.P. provided CD169-DTR mice; D.J.I. provided Lipo-CpG; M.E.M., C.A.D., and M.F. performed and analyzed the SARS-CoV-2 neutralization experiments and SARS-CoV-2 infections; E.S. and S.J.E. performed and analyzed VirScan experiments; M.D.K., Z.M., D.W.L., H.E.E., and D.L.W. provided fungal li-gands, quantifed the mannan formulation, and contributed to the design of the experiments; I.Z. conceived the project, designed the experiments, super-vised the study, and wrote the paper. All authors reviewed and provided input to the manuscript. 
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS 
F.B., E.N., T.R.O., I.Z., D.J.D., and O.L. are named inventors on invention dis-closures and patents involving vaccine adjuvants. S.J.E. is a founder of TSCAN Therapeutics, ImmuneID, MAZE Therapeutics, and Mirimus. S.J.E. serves on the scientifc advisory board of Homology Medicines, TSCAN Therapeutics, MAZE Therapetics, and XChem, and is an advisor for MPM, none of which impact this work. S.J.E. is an inventor on a patent application issued to the Brigham and Women＊s Hospital (US20160320406A) that covers the use of the VirScan library to identify pathogen antibodies in blood. The other authors declare no commercial or fnancial confict of interest. 


Received: January 7, 2021 Revised: October 19, 2021 Accepted: January 14, 2022 Published: February 10, 2022 
REFERENCES 
Acton, S.E., Farrugia, A.J., Astarita, J.L., Moura. o-Sa∩ , D., Jenkins, R.P., Nye, E., Hooper, S., van Blijswijk, J., Rogers, N.C., Snelgrove, K.J., et al. (2014). Den-
dritic cells control fbroblastic reticular network tension and lymph node expansion. Nature 514, 498每502. 
Acton, S.E., and Reis e Sousa, C. (2016). Dendritic cells in remodeling of lymph 
nodes during immune responses. Immunol. Rev. 271, 221每229. Bachmann, M.F., and Jennings, G.T. (2010). Vaccine delivery: a matter of size, geometry, kinetics and molecular patterns. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10, 787每796. 
Banchereau, J., and Steinman, R.M. (1998). Dendritic cells and the control of 
immunity. Nature 392, 245每252. Barrat, F.J., Crow, M.K., and Ivashkiv, L.B. (2019). Interferon target-gene expression and epigenomic signatures in health and disease. Nat. Immunol. 20, 1574每1583. 
Borriello, F., Pietrasanta, C., Lai, J.C.Y., Walsh, L.M., Sharma, P., O＊Driscoll, D.N., Ramirez, J., Brightman, S., Pugni, L., Mosca, F., et al. (2017). Identifca-
tion and characterization of stimulator of interferon genes as a robust adjuvant target for early life immunization. Front. Immunol. 8, 1772. 
Borriello, F., Zanoni, I., and Granucci, F. (2020). Cellular and molecular mech-
anisms of antifungal innate immunity at epithelial barriers: the role of C-type lectin receptors. Eur. J. Immunol. 50, 317每325. 
Bray, N.L., Pimentel, H., Melsted, P., and Pachter, L. (2016). Near-optimal 
probabilistic RNA-seq quantifcation. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 525每527. Brown, G.D., Willment, J.A., and Whitehead, L. (2018). C-type lectins in immu-
nity and homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18, 374每389. 
Brubaker, S.W., Bonham, K.S., Zanoni, I., and Kagan, J.C. (2015). Innate im-
mune pattern recognition: a cell biological perspective. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 33, 257每290. 
Cancel, J.C., Crozat, K., Dalod, M., and Mattiuz, R. (2019). Are conventional Type 1 dendritic cells critical for protective antitumor immunity and how? Front. Immunol. 10,9. 
Cao, Y., Su, B., Guo, X., Sun, W., Deng, Y., Bao, L., Zhu, Q., Zhang, X., Zheng, Y., Geng, C., et al. (2020). Potent neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 identifed by high-throughput single-cell sequencing of convalescent patients＊ B cells. Cell 182, 73每84, e16. 
Coccia, M., Collignon, C., Herve∩ , C., Chalon, A., Welsby, I., Detienne, S., van Helden, M.J., Dutta, S., Genito, C.J., Waters, N.C., et al. (2017). Cellular and molecular synergy in AS01-adjuvanted vaccines results in an early IFNgamma response promoting vaccine immunogenicity. NPJ Vaccines 2,25. 
Corbett, K.S., Flynn, B., Foulds, K.E., Francica, J.R., Boyoglu-Barnum, S., Werner, A.P., Flach, B., O＊Connell, S., Bock, K.W., Minai, M., et al. (2020). Eval-
uation of the mRNA-1273 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 in nonhuman pri-
mates. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 1544每1555. 
De Giovanni, M., Cutillo, V., Giladi, A., Sala, E., Maganuco, C.G., Medaglia, C., Di Lucia, P., Bono, E., Cristofani, C., Consolo, E., et al. (2020). Spatiotemporal regulation of type I interferon expression determines the antiviral polarization of CD4(+) T cells. Nat. Immunol. 21, 321每330. 
Didierlaurent, A.M., Collignon, C., Bourguignon, P., Wouters, S., Fierens, K., Fochesato, M., Dendouga, N., Langlet, C., Malissen, B., Lambrecht, B.N., et al. (2014). Enhancement of adaptive immunity by the human vaccine adju-
vant AS01 depends on activated dendritic cells. J. Immunol. 193, 1920每1930. 
Eisenbarth, S.C., Colegio, O.R., O＊Connor, W., Sutterwala, F.S., and Flavell, 
R.A. (2008). Crucial role for the Nalp3 infammasome in the immunostimulatory properties of aluminium adjuvants. Nature 453, 1122每1126. 


Evavold, C.L., and Kagan, J.C. (2019). Infammasomes: threat-assessment or-

ganelles of the innate immune system. Immunity 51, 609每624. Federico, A., and Monti, S. (2020). hypeR: an R package for geneset enrich-
ment workfows. Bioinformatics 36, 1307每1308. 
Fletcher, A.L., Malhotra, D., Acton, S.E., Lukacs-Kornek, V., Bellemare-Pellet-
ier, A., Curry, M., Armant, M., and Turley, S.J. (2011). Reproducible isolation of lymph node stromal cells reveals site-dependent differences in fbroblastic reticular cells. Front. Immunol. 2,35. 
Goodridge, H.S., Reyes, C.N., Becker, C.A., Katsumoto, T.R., Ma, J., Wolf, A.J., Bose, N., Chan, A.S., Magee, A.S., Danielson, M.E., et al. (2011). Activa-
tion of the innate immune receptor Dectin-1 upon formation of a ＆phagocytic synapse. Nature 472, 471每475. 
Graham, B.S. (2020). Rapid COVID-19 vaccine development. Science 368, 945每946. 
Grant, S.M., Lou, M., Yao, L., Germain, R.N., and Radtke, A.J. (2020). The lymph node at a glance 每 how spatial organization optimizes the immune response. J. Cell Sci. 133. 
Gringhuis, S.I., den Dunnen, J., Litjens, M., van der Vlist, M., Wevers, B., Bruijns, S.C., and Geijtenbeek, T.B. (2009). Dectin-1 directs T helper cell differ-
entiation by controlling noncanonical NF-kB activation through Raf-1 and Syk. Nat. Immunol. 10, 203每213. 
Hassan, A.O., Case, J.B., Winkler, E.S., Thackray, L.B., Kafai, N.M., Bailey, A.L., McCune, B.T., Fox, J.M., Chen, R.E., Alsoussi, W.B., et al. (2020). A SARS-CoV-2 infection model in mice demonstrates protection by neutralizing antibodies. Cell 182, 744每753, e4. 
Irvine, D.J., Aung, A., and Silva, M. (2020). Controlling timing and location in 
vaccines. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 158, 91每115. Ivashkiv, L.B. (2018). IFNg: signalling, epigenetics and roles in immunity, meta-
bolism, disease and cancer immunotherapy. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18, 545每558. 
Iwasaki, A., and Medzhitov, R. (2004). Toll-like receptor control of the adaptive 
immune responses. Nat. Immunol. 5, 987每995. Jackson, L.A., Anderson, E.J., Rouphael, N.G., Roberts, P.C., Makhene, M., Coler, R.N., McCullough, M.P., Chappell, J.D., Denison, M.R., Stevens, L.J., et al. (2020). An mRNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 -preliminary report. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 1920每1931. 
Janeway, C.A., Jr., and Medzhitov, R. (2002). Innate immune recognition. 
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 20, 197每216. Kastenmu“ ller, W., Torabi-Parizi, P., Subramanian, N., La“ mmermann, T., and Germain, R.N. (2012). A spatially-organized multicellular innate immune response in lymph nodes limits systemic pathogen spread. Cell 150, 1235每1248. 
Keech, C., Albert, G., Cho, I., Robertson, A., Reed, P., Neal, S., Plested, J.S., Zhu, M., Cloney-Clark, S., Zhou, H., et al. (2020). Phase 1每2 trial of a SARS-
CoV-2 recombinant spike protein nanoparticle vaccine. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 2320每2332. 
Kruppa, M., Greene, R.R., Noss, I., Lowman, D.W., and Williams, D.L. (2011). 
C. albicans increases cell wall mannoprotein, but not mannan, in response to blood, serum and cultivation at physiological temperature. Glycobiology 21, 1173每1180. 
Le Bon, A., Montoya, M., Edwards, M.J., Thompson, C., Burke, S.A., Ashton, M., Lo, D., Tough, D.F., and Borrow, P. (2006). A role for the transcription factor RelB in IFN-alpha production and in IFN-alpha-stimulated cross-priming. Eur. J. Immunol. 36, 2085每2093. 
Leal, J.M., Huang, J.Y., Kohli, K., Stoltzfus, C., Lyons-Cohen, M.R., Olin, B.E., Gale, M., Jr., and Gerner, M.Y. (2021). Innate cell microenvironments in lymph nodes shape the generation of T cell responses during type I infammation. Sci. Immunol. 6. 
Leist, S.R., Dinnon, K.H., 3rd, Scha“ fer, A., Tse, L.V., Okuda, K., Hou, Y.J., West, A., Edwards, C.E., Sanders, W., Fritch, E.J., et al. (2020). A mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 induces acute lung injury and mortality in standard lab-
oratory mice. Cell 183, 1070每1085, e12. 



Article 
Lian, J., Ozga, A.J., Sokol, C.L., and Luster, A.D. (2020). Targeting lymph node niches enhances type 1 immune responses to immunization. Cell Rep 31, 107679. 
Lionakis, M.S., Iliev, I.D., and Hohl, T.M. (2017). Immunity against fungi. JCI 
Insight 2, e93156. Liu, H., Moynihan, K.D., Zheng, Y., Szeto, G.L., Li, A.V., Huang, B., Van Egeren, D.S., Park, C., and Irvine, D.J. (2014). Structure-based programming of lymph-node targeting in molecular vaccines. Nature 507, 519每522. 
Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold 
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15, 550. Lowman, D.W., Ensley, H.E., Greene, R.R., Knagge, K.J., Williams, D.L., and Kruppa, M.D. (2011). Mannan structural complexity is decreased when Candida albicans is cultivated in blood or serum at physiological temperature. Carbohydr. Res. 346, 2752每2759. 
Lowman, D.W., Greene, R.R., Bearden, D.W., Kruppa, M.D., Pottier, M., Mon-
teiro, M.A., Soldatov, D.V., Ensley, H.E., Cheng, S.C., Netea, M.G., and Wil-
liams, D.L. (2014). Novel structural features in Candida albicans hyphal glucan provide a basis for differential innate immune recognition of hyphae versus yeast. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 3432每3443. 
Lv, Z., Deng, Y.Q., Ye, Q., Cao, L., Sun, C.Y., Fan, C., Huang, W., Sun, S., Sun, Y., Zhu, L., et al. (2020). Structural basis for neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV by a potent therapeutic antibody. Science 369, 1505每1509. 
Lynn, G.M., Laga, R., Darrah, P.A., Ishizuka, A.S., Balaci, A.J., Dulcey, A.E., Pechar, M., Pola, R., Gerner, M.Y., Yamamoto, A., et al. (2015). In vivo charac-
terization of the physicochemical properties of polymer-linked TLR agonists that enhance vaccine immunogenicity. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 1201每1210. 
Mart.∩n-Fontecha, A., Thomsen, L.L., Brett, S., Gerard, C., Lipp, M., Lanzavec-
chia, A., and Sallusto, F. (2004). Induced recruitment of NK cells to lymph no-
des provides IFN-g 
for T(H)1 priming. Nat. Immunol. 5, 1260每1265. 
Matzinger, P. (1994). Tolerance, danger, and the extended family. Annu. Rev. 
Immunol. 12, 991每1045. McMahan, K., Yu, J., Mercado, N.B., Loos, C., Tostanoski, L.H., Chandrashe-
kar, A., Liu, J., Peter, L., Atyeo, C., Zhu, A., et al. (2021). Correlates of protec-
tion against SARS-CoV-2 in rhesus macaques. Nature 590, 630每634. 
Mercado, N.B., Zahn, R., Wegmann, F., Loos, C., Chandrashekar, A., Yu, J., Liu, J., Peter, L., McMahan, K., Tostanoski, L.H., et al. (2020). Single-shot Ad26 vaccine protects against SARS-CoV-2 in rhesus macaques. Nature 586, 583每588. 
Miyake, Y., Asano, K., Kaise, H., Uemura, M., Nakayama, M., and Tanaka, M. (2007). Critical role of macrophages in the marginal zone in the suppression of immune responses to apoptotic cell-associated antigens. J. Clin. Invest. 117, 2268每2278. 
Moran, I., Grootveld, A.K., Nguyen, A., and Phan, T.G. (2019). Subcapsular si-
nus macrophages: the seat of innate and adaptive memory in murine lymph nodes. Trends Immunol 40, 35每48. 
Morefeld, G.L., Jiang, D., Romero-Mendez, I.Z., Geahlen, R.L., Hogenesch, H., and Hem, S.L. (2005). Effect of phosphorylation of ovalbumin on adsorption by aluminum-containing adjuvants and elution upon exposure to interstitial fuid. Vaccine 23, 1502每1506. 
Moyer, T.J., Kato, Y., Abraham, W., Chang, J.Y.H., Kulp, D.W., Watson, N., Turner, H.L., Menis, S., Abbott, R.K., Bhiman, J.N., et al. (2020). Engineered immunogen binding to alum adjuvant enhances humoral immunity. Nat. Med. 26, 430每440. 
Netea, M.G., Brown, G.D., Kullberg, B.J., and Gow, N.A. (2008). An integrated model of the recognition of Candida 
albicans 
by the innate immune system. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6, 67每78. 
O＊Hagan, D.T., Lodaya, R.N., and Lofano, G. (2020). The continued advance of 
vaccine adjuvants 每 ＆we can work it out. Semin. Immunol. 50, 101426. Ohl, L., Mohaupt, M., Czeloth, N., Hintzen, G., Kiafard, Z., Zwirner, J., Blanken-
stein, T., Henning, G., and Fo“ rster, R. (2004). CCR7 governs skin dendritic cell migration under infammatory and steady-state conditions. Immunity 21, 279每288. 


Article 
Rogers, T.F., Zhao, F., Huang, D., Beutler, N., Burns, A., He, W.T., Limbo, O., Smith, C., Song, G., Woehl, J., et al. (2020). Isolation of potent SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies and protection from disease in a small animal model. Science 369, 956每963. 
Saha, I., Jaiswal, H., Mishra, R., Nel, H.J., Schreuder, J., Kaushik, M., Singh Chauhan, K., Singh Rawat, B., Thomas, R., Naik, S., et al. (2020). RelB sup-
presses type I interferon signaling in dendritic cells. Cell. Immunol. 349, 104043. 
Saito, M., Iwawaki, T., Taya, C., Yonekawa, H., Noda, M., Inui, Y., Mekada, E., Kimata, Y., Tsuru, A., and Kohno, K. (2001). Diphtheria toxin receptor-medi-
ated conditional and targeted cell ablation in transgenic mice. Nat. Biotechnol. 19, 746每750. 
Sangesland, M., and Lingwood, D. (2021). Antibody focusing to conserved sites of vulnerability: the immunological pathways for ＆universal＊ infuenza vac-
cines. Vaccines (Basel) 9, 125. 
Santus, W., Barresi, S., Mingozzi, F., Broggi, A., Orlandi, I., Stamerra, G., Vai, M., Martorana, A.M., Polissi, A., Ko“ hler, J.R., et al. (2017). Skin infections are eliminated by cooperation of the fbrinolytic and innate immune systems. Sci. Immunol. 2, eaan2725. 
Scha“ fer, A., Muecksch, F., Lorenzi, J.C.C., Leist, S.R., Cipolla, M., Bournazos, S., Schmidt, F., Maison, R.M., Gazumyan, A., Martinez, D.R., et al. (2021). Anti-
body potency, effector function, and combinations in protection and therapy for SARS-CoV-2 infection in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 218, e20201993. 
Shi, R., Shan, C., Duan, X., Chen, Z., Liu, P., Song, J., Song, T., Bi, X., Han, C., Wu, L., et al. (2020). A human neutralizing antibody targets the receptor-bind-
ing site of SARS-CoV-2. Nature 584, 120每124. 
Shrock, E., Fujimura, E., Kula, T., Timms, R.T., Lee, I.H., Leng, Y., Robinson, M.L., Sie, B.M., Li, M.Z., Chen, Y., et al. (2020). Viral epitope profling of COVID-19 patients reveals cross-reactivity and correlates of severity. Science 370. 
Soderberg, K.A., Payne, G.W., Sato, A., Medzhitov, R., Segal, S.S., and Iwa-
saki, A. (2005). Innate control of adaptive immunity via remodeling of lymph node feed arteriole. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 16315每16320. 
Soneson, C., Love, M.I., and Robinson, M.D. (2015). Differential analyses for RNA-seq: transcript-level estimates improve gene-level inferences. F1000Res 4, 1521. 
Sun, S.C. (2017). The non-canonical NF-kB pathway in immunity and infam-

mation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 17, 545每558. Tan, C.W., Chia, W.N., Qin, X., Liu, P., Chen, M.I., Tiu, C., Hu, Z., Chen, V.C., Young, B.E., Sia, W.R., et al. (2020). A SARS-CoV-2 surrogate virus neutraliza-
tion test based on antibody-mediated blockage of ACE2-spike protein-protein interaction. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 1073每1078. 


Tortorici, M.A., Beltramello, M., Lempp, F.A., Pinto, D., Dang, H.V., Rosen, L.E., McCallum, M., Bowen, J., Minola, A., Jaconi, S., et al. (2020). Ultrapotent human antibodies protect against SARS-CoV-2 challenge via multiple mecha-
nisms. Science 370, 950每957. 
Walls, A.C., Park, Y.J., Tortorici, M.A., Wall, A., McGuire, A.T., and Veesler, D. (2020). Structure, function, and antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glyco-
protein. Cell 181, 281每292, e286. 
Walsh, E.E., Frenck, R.W., Jr., Falsey, A.R., Kitchin, N., Absalon, J., Gurtman, A., Lockhart, S., Neuzil, K., Mulligan, M.J., Bailey, R., et al. (2020). Safety and immunogenicity of two RNA-based Covid-19 vaccine candidates. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 2439每2450. 
Wong, E., Montoya, B., Stotesbury, C., Ferez, M., Xu, R.H., and Sigal, L.J. (2019). Langerhans cells orchestrate the protective antiviral innate immune response in the lymph node. Cell Rep 29, 3047每3059.e3. 
Wong, E., Xu, R.H., Rubio, D., Lev, A., Stotesbury, C., Fang, M., and Sigal, L.J. (2018). Migratory dendritic cells, Group 1 innate lymphoid cells, and infamma-
tory monocytes collaborate to recruit NK cells to the virus-infected lymph node. Cell Rep 24, 142每154. 
Wrapp, D., Wang, N., Corbett, K.S., Goldsmith, J.A., Hsieh, C.L., Abiona, O., Graham, B.S., and McLellan, J.S. (2020). Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-
nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation. Science 367, 1260每1263. 
Xu, G.J., Kula, T., Xu, Q., Li, M.Z., Vernon, S.D., Ndung＊u, T., Ruxrungtham, K., Sanchez, J., Brander, C., Chung, R.T., et al. (2015a). Viral immunology. Comprehensive serological profling of human populations using a synthetic human virome. Science 348, aaa0698. 
Xu, R.H., Wong, E.B., Rubio, D., Roscoe, F., Ma, X., Nair, S., Remakus, S., Schwendener, R., John, S., Shlomchik, M., et al. (2015b). Sequential activation of two pathogen-sensing pathways required for Type I interferon expression and resistance to an acute DNA virus infection. Immunity 43, 1148每1159. 
Xu, X., Xu, J.F., Zheng, G., Lu, H.W., Duan, J.L., Rui, W., Guan, J.H., Cheng, L.Q., Yang, D.D., Wang, M.C., and Sigal, L.J. (2018). CARD9(S12N) facilitates the production of IL-5 by alveolar macrophages for the induction of type 2 im-
mune responses. Nat. Immunol. 19, 547每560. 
Zhu, L.L., Zhao, X.Q., Jiang, C., You, Y., Chen, X.P., Jiang, Y.Y., Jia, X.M., and Lin, X. (2013). C-type lectin receptors Dectin-3 and Dectin-2 form a heterodi-
meric pattern-recognition receptor for host defense against fungal infection. Immunity 39, 324每334. 
Zost, S.J., Gilchuk, P., Case, J.B., Binshtein, E., Chen, R.E., Nkolola, J.P., Scha“ fer, A., Reidy, J.X., Trivette, A., Nargi, R.S., et al. (2020). Potently neutral-
izing and protective human antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. Nature 584, 443每449. 

ll 




Article 
STAR+METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE 

REAGENT or RESOURCE  SOURCE  IDENTIFIER  
Antibodies  
Anti-CD45 BV510  BioLegend  Cat# 103138 RRID:AB_2563061  
Anti-CD45 Alexa Fluor 700  BioLegend  Cat# 103128  
RRID:AB_493715  
anti-CD45 APC  BioLegend  Cat# 103111  
RRID:AB_312976  
anti-CD45 PerCP/Cy5.5  BioLegend  Cat# 103132  
RRID:AB_893340  
anti-CD3 PE/Dazzle 594  BioLegend  Cat# 100348  
RRID:AB_2564029  
anti-CD3 BV510  BioLegend  Cat# 100353  
RRID:AB_2565879  
anti-TCRb Alexa Fluor 700  BioLegend  Cat# 109224  
RRID:AB_1027648  
anti-CD4 PE/Cy5  BioLegend  Cat# 100409  
RRID:AB_312694  
anti-CD19 PE/Dazzle 594  BioLegend  Cat# 115554  
RRID:AB_2564001  
anti-CD19 BV650  BioLegend  Cat# 115541  
RRID:AB_11204087  
anti-NK1.1 PE/Dazzle 594  BioLegend  Cat# 108747  
RRID:AB_2564219  
anti-NK1.1 BV421  BioLegend  Cat# 108731  
RRID:AB_10895916  
anti-CD49b Alexa Fluor 488  BioLegend  Cat# 108913  
RRID:AB_492879  
anti-Ter119 PE/Dazzle 594  BioLegend  Cat# 116243  
RRID:AB_2565871  
anti-I-A/I-E PE/Cy7  BioLegend  Cat# 107629  
RRID:AB_2290801  
anti-Ly6G PerCP/Cy5.5  BioLegend  Cat# 127616  
RRID:AB_1877271  
anti-CD11b Pacifc Blue  BioLegend  Cat# 101223  
RRID:AB_755985  
anti-Ly6C BV711  BioLegend  Cat# 128037  
RRID:AB_2562630  
anti-CD11c BV785  BioLegend  Cat# 117336  
RRID:AB_2565268  
anti-CD11c APC  BioLegend  Cat# 117309  
RRID:AB_313778  
anti-CD86 APC/Cy7  BioLegend  Cat# 105030  
RRID:AB_2244452  
anti-CD86 APC  BioLegend  Cat# 105012  
RRID:AB_493342  
anti-OX40L PE  BioLegend  Cat# 108806  
RRID:AB_313405  
anti-CD169 APC  BioLegend  Cat# 142417  
RRID:AB_2565640  
(Continued on next page)  



ll 

Article 


Continued 
REAGENT or RESOURCE  SOURCE  IDENTIFIER  
anti-CD169 Alexa Fluor 647  BioLegend  Cat# 142407  
RRID:AB_2563620  
anti-CD4 APC/Fire 750  BioLegend  Cat# 100459  
RRID:AB_2572110  
anti-CD8 PE/Cy7  BioLegend  Cat# 100721  
RRID:AB_312760  
anti-CD45R/B220 Alexa Fluor 594  BioLegend  Cat# 103254  
RRID:AB_2563229  
anti-IFNg PE  BioLegend  Cat# 505807  
RRID:AB_315402  
anti-CD3 Biotin  BioLegend  Cat# 100304  
RRID:AB_312669  
anti-CD19 Biotin  BioLegend  Cat# 115503  
RRID:AB_313638  
anti-NK1.1 Biotin  BioLegend  Cat# 108703  
RRID:AB_313390  
anti-Ter119 Biotin  BioLegend  Cat# 116204  
RRID:AB_313705  
TrueStain FcX  BioLegend  Cat# 101320  
RRID:AB_1574975  
True-Stain Monocyte Blocker  BioLegend  Cat# 426102  
RRID:N/A  
anti-Asialo-GM1  BioLegend  Cat# 146002  
RRID:AB_2562206  
anti-Dectin-2 PE  Miltenyi Biotec  Cat# 130-116-910  
RRID:AB_2733702  
anti-Dectin-2  GeneTex  Cat# GTX41453  
RRID:AB_11164148  
anti-phopsho-Syk (Tyr525/526)  Cell Signaling Technology  Cat# 2711S  
RRID:AB_2197215  
anti-CD62L blocking antibody  Bio X Cell  Cat# BE0021  
RRID:AB_1107665  
anti-IFNY blocking antibody  Bio X Cell  Cat# BP0055  
RRID:AB_2894796  
anti-IFNAR1 blocking antibody  Bio X Cell  Cat# BP0241  
RRID:AB_2894815  
anti-Ly6G depleting antibody  Bio X Cell  Cat# BP0075-1  
RRID:AB_2894803  
Isotype control rat IgG2a  Bio X Cell  Cat# BE0089  
RRID:AB_1107769  
Isotype control rat IgG1  Bio X Cell  Cat# BP0290  
RRID:AB_2894746  
Isotype control mouse IgG1  Bio X Cell  Cat# BE0083  
RRID:AB_1107784  
Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rat  Jackson ImmunoResearch Lab  Cat# 712-545-150  
secondary antibody  RRID:AB_2340683  
HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibody  Southern Biotech  Cat# 1036-05  
RRID:AB_2794348  
HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG1 antibody  Southern Biotech  Cat# 1071-05  
RRID:AB_2794426  
(Continued on next page)  


ll 




Article 
Continued 

REAGENT or RESOURCE  SOURCE  IDENTIFIER  
HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG2c  Southern Biotech  Cat# 1078-05  
antibody  RRID:AB_2794462  
HRP-conjugated anti-human IgG Fc  Southern Biotech  Cat# 1033-05  
antibody  RRID:AB_2737432  

Bacterial and virus strains  
Candida albicans strain SC5314  Provided by Richard Calderone  N/A  
(Georgetown University Medical Center)  
SARS-CoV-2 (WA-1)  Provided by Dr. Natalie Thornburg/CDC  N/A  
Infuenza virus A/Puerto Rico/8/1934  BEI Resources, NIAID, NIH  N/A  
(H1N1) (NR-348)  
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins  
Zombie Red Fixable Viability Kit DAPI  BioLegend Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# 423109 Cat# D1306  

CellTrace CFSE Cell Proliferation Kit  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# C34554  
Alexa Fluor 488 NHS Ester  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# A20000  
(Succinimidyl Ester)  
Iscove＊s Modifed Dubecco＊s  Lonza  Cat# 12-722F  
Medium (IMDM)  
Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS)  Lonza  Cat# 17-516F  
Penicillin/Streptomycin (pen/strep)  Lonza  Cat# 17-602E  
L-Glutamine (L-Gln)  Lonza  Cat# 17-605E  
Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS)  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# 10437-028  
Collagenase from Clostridium histolyticum  MilliporeSigma  Cat# C0130  
Deoxyribonuclease (DNase) I from bovine  MilliporeSigma  Cat# DN25  
pancreas  
Dispase II  MilliporeSigma  Cat# D4693  
LPS from E. coli, Serotype O55:B5  Enzo Lifesciences  Cat# ALX-581-013-L002  
(TLRGRADE )  
Curdlan  Wako Chemicals  Cat# 030-09903  
Mannans and mannans-DAP  Provided by Michael D Kruppa, Zuchao Ma  N/A  
and David L Williams (East Tennessee State  
University)  
b-glucans and b-glucans-DAP  Provided by Michael D Kruppa, Zuchao Ma  N/A  
and David L Williams (East Tennessee State  
University)  
CountBright Absolute Counting Beads  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# C36950  
Carboxyl latex beads 3 mm  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# C37282  
WGP-S  InvivoGen  Cat# tlrl-wgps  
WGP-Dispersable  InvivoGen  Cat# tlrl-wgp  
Lipo-CpG  Provided by Darrell J. Irvine (Koch Institute  N/A  
for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT)  
Diphtheria toxin (unnicked) from  Cayman Chemical  Cat# 19657  
Corynebacterium diphtheriae  
Ovalbumin (OVA) EndoFit  InvivoGen  Cat# vac-pova  
Alhydrogel adjuvant 2%  InvivoGen  Cat# vac-alu-250  
AddaVax  InvivoGen  Cat# vac-adx-10  
AddaS03  InvivoGen  Cat# vac-as03-10  
PHAD (synthetic monophosphoryl lipid A)  Avanti Polar Lipids  Cat# 699810  
Streptavidin Microbeads  Miltenyi Biotec  Cat# 130-048-101  

TRI Reagent Thermo Fisher Scientifc Cat# AM9738 
(Continued on next page) 


ll 

Article 


Continued 
REAGENT or RESOURCE  SOURCE  IDENTIFIER  
Recombinant pre-fusion stabilized  Plasmids provided by Drs. Berney S.  N/A  
SARS-CoV-2 Spike trimer  Graham (NIH Vaccine Research Center)  
RBD  Plasmids provided by Aaron G. Schmidt  N/A  
(Ragon Institute)  
PepTivator SARS-CoV-2 Prot_S  Miltenyi Biotec  Cat# 130-126-700  
Flublok vaccine (quadrivalent  Boston Children＊s Hospital Pharmacy  Cat# NDC 49281-720-10  
formula 2020 -2021)  
Infuenza A H1N1 (A/Puerto Rico/8/1934)  Sino Biological  Cat# 11684-V08H  
recombinant hemagglutinin (rPR8)  
Brefeldin A  BioLegend  Cat# 420601  
Hoechst 33342  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# 62249  
Prolong Gold anti-fade mounting media  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# P10144  
Cxcl9 qPCR primers  MilliporeSigma  M_Cxcl9_1  
Gbp2 qPCR primers  MilliporeSigma  M_Gpb2_1  
I.t2 qPCR primers  MilliporeSigma  M_Ift2_1  
Rsad2 qPCR primers  MilliporeSigma  M_Rsad2_1  
Il6 qPCR primers  MilliporeSigma  M_Il6_1  
Cxcl1 qPCR primers  MilliporeSigma  M_Cxcl1_1  
Rpl13a qPCR primers  MilliporeSigma  M_Rpl13a_1  
Gapdh qPCR primers  Integrated DNA Technologies  Mm.PT.39a.1  
CD4 MicroBeads  Miltenyi Biotec  Cat# 130-117-043  
CD8a MicroBeads  Miltenyi Biotec  Cat# 130-117-044  
CellTrace CFSE  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# C34554  
Recombinant human ACE2  MilliporeSigma  Cat# SAE0064  
RBD-Fc  R&D Systems  Cat# 10499-CV-100  
Protein A Dynabeads  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# 10001D  
Protein G Dynabeads  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# 10003D  
Ultra Pure Agarose  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# A9539  

Critical commercial assays  
TNF ELISA kit  BioLegend  Cat# 430915  
IL-2 ELISA kit  BioLegend  Cat# 431001  
IFNY ELISA kit  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# 88-7314-22  
TruSeq Stranded mRNA library Prep kit  Illumina  Cat# RS-122-2101  
SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# 11754050  
Ion AmpliSeq Transcriptome Mouse Gene  Thermo Fisher Scientifc  Cat# A36553  
Expression Kit  

Deposited data 
RNA sequencing data  This paper  GSE193419  
Experimental models: Organisms/strains  
C57BL/6J Wild-type  Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 000664  
CB6F1  Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 100007  
B6.129P2(C)-Ccr7tm1Rfor/J, Ccr7-/- Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 006621  
B6.129S2-Ifnar1tm1Agt/Mmjax, Ifnar-/- Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 32045-JAX  
B6.Cg-Ifngr1tm1Agt Ifnar1tm1.2Ees/J,  Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 029098  
Ifnar-/-Ifngr-/- 
B6.FVB-1700016L21RikTg(Itgax-DTR/EGFP)  Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 004509  
57Lan/J, CD11c-DTR  
B6.Cg-Tg(Itgax-cre)1-1Reiz/J, CD11ccre  Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 008068  
(Continued on next page)  


ll 




Article 
Continued 

REAGENT or RESOURCE  SOURCE  IDENTIFIER  
B6.Cg-Relbtm1Ukl/J, Relbf/f  Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 028719  
B6.129S4-Ccr2tm1Ifc/J, Ccr2-/- Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 004999  
B6.129S(C)-Batf3tm1Kmm/J, Batf3-/- Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 013755  
B6.129-Card9tm1Xlin/J, Card9-/- Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 028652  
B6.129S6-Clec7atm1Gdb/J, Clec7a-/- Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 012337  
C57BL/6-Tg(TcraTcrb)1100Mjb/J, OT-I  Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 003831  
B6.129P2-Fcer1gtm1Rav N12, Fcer1g-/- Taconic  Cat# 583  
Clec4n-/- Provided by Drs. Nora A. Barrett and  N/A  
Yoichiro Iwakura  
B6;129-Siglec1<tm1(HBEGF)Mtka>  Provided by Dr. F. Pucci from  RBRC04395  
(CD169-DTR)  Riken Institute  
B6.Cg-Tg(TcraTcrb)425Cbn/J, OT-II  Jackson Laboratory  Cat# 004194  
VeroE6 cells  ATCC  Cat# CRL-1586  
Specifc-pathogen-free chicken (SPF) eggs  Charles River Laboratories  Cat# 10100329  

Software and algorithms  
GraphPad Prism 8.0.2  GraphPad  Prism -GraphPad RRID:SCR_002798  
FlowJo software  Tree star  FlowJo v10.8 RRID:SCR_008520  
ImageJ  NIH  ImageJ (nih.gov) RRID:SCR_003070  
Amnis Ideas Software  Luminex Corporation  IDEAS 6.2  

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY 
Lead contact 

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulflled by the lead contact, Ivan Zanoni (ivan.zanoni@childrens.harvard.edu; @Lo_Zanzi). 
Materials availability 

All experimental models and reagents will be made available upon installment of a material transfer agreement. 
Data and code availability 

All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request. 
RNA sequencing data accession number: GSE193419. 
This paper does not report original code. 

Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request. 
Data and materials availability: all data are available in the manuscript or the supplementary materials. 
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS 
Mice 

C57BL/6J (Jax 00664) (wild type), CB6F1 (Jax 100007), B6.129P2(C)-Ccr7tm1Rfor/J (Ccr7-/-, Jax 006621), B6.129S2-Ifnar1tm1Agt/Mmjax 
(Ifnar-/-,Jax32045-JAX),B6.Cg-Ifngr1tm1Agt Ifnar1tm1.2Ees/J (Ifnar-/-Ifngr-/-,Jax029098),B6.FVB-1700016L21RikTg(Itgax-DTR/EGFP)57Lan/J /J (Relb./. 
(CD11c-DTR, Jax 004509), B6.Cg-Tg(Itgax-cre)1-1Reiz/J (Cd11ccre , Jax 008068), B6.Cg-Relbtm1Ukl , Jax 028719), B6.129S4-Ccr2tm1Ifc/J (Ccr2-/-, Jax 004999), B6.129S(C)-Batf3tm1Kmm/J (Batf3-/-, Jax 013755), B6.129-Card9tm1Xlin/J (Card9-/-, Jax 028652), B6.129S6-Clec7atm1Gdb/J (Clec7a-/-, Jax 012337) and C57BL/6-Tg(TcraTcrb)1100Mjb/J (OT-I, Jax 003831) were purchased from Jackson Labs. B6.129P2-Fcer1gtm1Rav N12 (Fcer1g-/-, Model 583) were purchased from Taconic. Clec4n-/-mice were kindly pro-vided by Drs. Nora A. Barrett and Yoichiro Iwakura. B6;129-Siglec1<tm1(HBEGF)Mtka> (CD169-DTR) mice were kindly provided by Dr. F. Pucci and are from the Riken Institute (No. RBRC04395), deposited by Drs. Kenji Kohno and Masato Tanaka (Miyake et al., 2007; Saito et al., 2001). B6.Cg-Tg(TcraTcrb)425Cbn/J (OT-II, Jax 004194) were kindly provided by Juan Manuel Leyva-Castillo. 6-8 week-old female mice were used for all the experiments. Mice were housed under specifc pathogen-free conditions at Boston Children＊s Hospital, and all the procedures were approved under the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and oper-ated under the supervision of the department of Animal Resources at Children＊s Hospital (ARCH). 





Article 
Cell lines 
VeroE6 cells (ATCC, CRL-1586) were cultured in DMEM (Quality Biological, 112-014-101) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% pen/ strep. Expi293 cells were grown in Expi293 Expression Medium (ThermoFisher Scientifc). Cells were maintained at 37C (5% CO2) and passaged when confuent. 
Viruses 
Infuenza virus A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1) (NR-348) was obtained through BEI Resources, NIAID, NIH, and propagated in the allan-toic cavity of 9-11 days old specifc-pathogen-free chicken (SPF) eggs (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA). Samples of SARS-CoV-2 were obtained from the CDC following isolation from a patient in Washington State (WA-1 strain -BEI #NR-52281). SARS-CoV-2 MA10 was generated in mice infected with the SARS-CoV-2 MA stock virus for the frst passage and with lung homog-enates of the previous passage for all following passages (passage 2 每 10). Clonal isolate from P10 was plaque purifed to obtain SARS-CoV-2 MA10. All virus stocks were propagated on Vero E6 cells. 
Yeasts 
Candida albicans strain SC5314 was maintained on blood agar (Remel) plates grown at 37C. 
METHOD DETAILS 
Reagents and antibodies 
For fow cytometry, imaging cytometry, fuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and confocal microscopy experiments the following reagents and antibodies were used: anti-CD45 BV510 (30-F11), anti-CD45 Alexa Fluor 700 (30-F11), anti-CD45 APC (30-F11), anti-CD45 PerCP/Cy5.5 (30-F11), anti-CD3 PE/Dazzle 594 (17A2), anti-CD3 BV510 (17A2), anti-TCRb Alexa Fluor 400 (H57-597), anti-CD4 PE/Cy5 (GK1.5), anti-CD19 PE/Dazzle 594 (6D5), anti-CD19 BV650 (6D5), anti-NK1.1 PE/Dazzle 594 (PK136), anti-NK1.1 BV421 (PK136), anti-CD49b Alexa Fluor 488 (DX5), anti-Ter119 PE/Dazzle 594 (TER-119), anti-I-A/I-E PE/Cy7 (M5/114.15.2), anti-Ly6G PerCP/Cy5.5 (1A8), anti-CD11b Pacifc Blue (M1/70), anti-Ly6C BV711 (HK1.4), anti-CD11c BV785 (N418), anti-CD11c APC (N418), anti-CD86 APC/Cy7 (GL-1), anti-CD86 APC (GL-1), anti-OX40L PE (RM134L), anti-CD169 APC (3D6.112), anti-CD169 Alexa Fluor 647 (3D6.112), anti-CD4 APC/Fire 750 (GK1.5), anti-CD8 PE/Cy7 (53-6.7), anti-CD45R/B220 Alexa Fluor 594 (RA3-6B2), anti-IFNg PE (XMG1.2), anti-CD3 Biotin (145-2C11), anti-CD19 Biotin (6D5), anti-NK1.1 Biotin (PK136), anti-Ter119 Biotin (TER-119), TrueStain FcX (93), True-Stain Monocyte Blocker and Zombie Red Fixable Viability Kit were purchased from BioLegend; anti-Dectin-2 PE (REA1001) was purchased from Miltenyi Biotec; rat anti-Dectin-2 (D2.11E4) was purchased from GeneTex; anti-phopsho-Syk (Tyr525/526) (C87C1) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology; CellTrace CFSE Cell Proliferation Kit, Alexa Fluor 488 NHS Ester (Succinimidyl Ester) and DAPI were pur-chased from Thermo Fisher Scientifc. 
For in vitro and in vivo experiments the following reagents were used: Iscove＊s Modifed Dubecco＊s Medium (IMDM), Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS), penicillin/streptomycin (pen/strep) and L-Glutamine (L-Gln) were purchased from Lonza; Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientifc; collagenase from Clostridium histolyticum, deoxyribonuclease (DNase) I from bovine pancreas and dispase II were purchased from MilliporeSigma; TLRGrade Escherichia coli LPS (Serotype O555:B5, 1 mg/ml) was purchased fromEnzo Life Sciences; curdlan (10 mg/ml) was purchasedfrom Wako Chemicals; mannans, b-glucans and their Alexa Fluor 488-conjugates (10 mg/ml for in vitro experiments, 500 mg/mouse for in vivo experiments) were provided by Michael D Kruppa, Zuchao Ma and David L Williams (East Tennessee State University); carboxyl latex beads 3 mm were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientifc and used directly (cell:bead ratio 1:10for in vitro experiments) or after coating with diaminopropanederivatized mannans pro-vided by Michael D Kruppa, Zuchao Ma and David L Wiliams (East Tennessee State University); WGP-S and WGP-D (500 mg/mouse for in vivo experiments) were purchased from InvivoGen; Lipo-CpG was provided by Darrell J. Irvine (Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT); diphtheria toxin (unnicked) from Corynebacterium diphtheriae (200 ng/mouse for CD11-DTR mice, 500 ng/mouse for CD169-DTR mice) was purchased form Cayman Chemical; ovalbumin (OVA) EndoFit (5 mg/mouse), Alhydrogel adjuvant 2% (AH, 2 mg/ ml for in vitro experiments, 100 mg/mouse for in vivo experiments), AddaVax (25 ml/mouse) and AddaS03 (25 ml/mouse) were purchased from InvivoGen; PHAD (synthetic monophosphoryl lipid A, 50 mg/mouse) was purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids; recombinant pre-fusion stabilized SARS-CoV-2 Spike trimer (1 mg/mouse) and RBD were expressed and purifed from plasmids generously provided by Drs. Berney S. Graham (NIH Vaccine Research Center) and Aaron G. Schmidt (Ragon Institute), respectively; SARS-CoV-2 Spike peptide pools (PepTivator SARS-CoV-2 Prot_S) were purchased from Miltenyi Biotec; Flublok vaccine (quadrivalent formula 2020 每 2021, composed of HAs from IAV A/Guangdong-Maonan/SWL1536/2019 [H1N1], IAV A/HongKong/2671/2019 [H3N2], infu-enza B virus B/Washington/02/2019 and infuenza B virus B/Phuket/3073/2013) was purchased from the Boston Children＊s Hospital Pharmacy; Infuenza A H1N1 (A/Puerto Rico/8/1934) recombinant hemagglutinin (rPR8) was purchased from Sino Biological; anti-Asialo-GM1 (Poly21460, 25 ml/mouse) was purchased from BioLegend; anti-CD62L (Mel-14, 100 mg/mouse), anti-IFNAR1 (MAR1-5A3, 500 mg/mouse), anti-IFNg (XMG1.2, 200 mg/mouse), anti-Ly6G (1A8, 50 mg/mouse) and their isotype controls rat IgG2a (2A3), rat IgG1 (HRPN) and mouse IgG1 (MOPC-21) were purchased from Bio X Cell. 
The formulation of alum and mannans (AH/mann) was obtained by admixture of alum (100 mg/10 ml), mannans (500 mg/25 ml) and saline (15 ml). When formulated with an antigen (e.g., SARS-CoV-2 Spike trimer or Flublok) the volume of saline was reduced 





Article 
accordingly in order to keep the total volume constant. This formulation is further described in the NIH/NIAID Vaccine Adjuvant Com-pendium (https://vac.niaid.nih.gov). 
Isolation of mannan from C. albicans 

For mannan isolation, C. albicans was inoculated into 15 l of YPD (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% dextrose) and grown for 20 hours at 37C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 g for 5 minutes. This resulted in a 100 g pellet from 15 l of media. We used a standard protocol for isolation and NMR characterization of the mannan (Kruppa et al., 2011; Lowman et al., 2011). In brief, the cell pellets were suspended in 200 ml of acetone to delipidate the cells for 20 minutes prior to centrifugation at 5000 g for 5 minutes, removal of acetone and drying of the pellet for an hour. Dried pellets were broken up and transferred to a tissue ho-mogenizer. An equivalent volume of acid-washed glass beads was added and 200 ml of dH2O was added to the mixture. The cells were subjected to bead beating for three 30 second pulses before the entire mixture was transferred to a 1 l fask. The material was autoclaved for 2 hours, allowed to cool and then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 5000 g. The supernatant was retained and the cell pellet discarded. Pronase (500 mg in 20 ml dH2O), which had been flter sterilized and heat treated for 20 minutes at 65C (to remove any glycosidic activity) was added to the supernatant along with sodium azide to a concentration of 1 mM. The mixture was then incu-bated overnight (20 hours) at 37C to allow for degradation of any proteins in the solution. Mannans were extracted by addition of an equal volume of Fehling＊s solution to the protease treated mannan solution and allowed to mix for one hour at room temperature. After mixing the solution was allowed to stand for 20 minutes to facilitate mannan precipitation. The supernatant was decanted and the precipitate was dissolved in 10 ml of 3M HCl, to enable release of copper from the reducing ends of the mannans. To the dissolved mannan solution 500 ml of an 8:1 mixture of methanol:acetic acid was added, and the mixture stirred to allow the mannan to precipitate overnight. After the material had settled, the supernatant was decanted, washed again with 500 ml of methanol, allow-ing six hours for the mannans to settle. The supernatant was decanted and the remaining precipitate was dissolved in 200 ml dH2O. The mannans were dialyzed against a 200-fold change of dH2O over 48 hours using a 2000 MW cutoff membrane to remove residual acid, methanol and other compounds from the extraction process. The dialysate was then subjected to lyophilization and stored at -20C until needed. A small sample (10 mg) of the material was subjected to NMR to confrm for the purity of the N-linked mannans (Lowman et al., 2011) and for assessment of molecular weight (Kruppa et al., 2011). Prior to in vitro or in vivo use the mannan is de-pyrogenated to remove any residual endotoxin and flter sterilized. 
Preparation of the diaminopropane (DAP) derivatized mannan 
Mannan(100mg)wasdissolved in6 mlof water,followedbyadditionof1,3-diaminopropane (0.6ml). Thereactionmixturewasstirredat ambient temperature for 1 hour. Sodium cyanoborohydride (300 mg) was added and the pH value of the reaction mixture was adjusted to 4.8 by slowly adding acetic acid (1.1 ml). The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature for 48 hours, then dialyzed with a 2000MWCO RCmembraneagainstultrapurewater (1000mlx 4).Theretentate washarvestedandlyophilized toyield theDAPattached mannan. The recovery was 88.5 mg, 88%. The mannan-DAP was characterized by 1H-NMR to confrm the identity of the compound. 
For conjugation with Alexa Fluor 488 NHS Ester (Succinimidyl Ester), 15 mg of mannan-DAP were resuspended in 1 ml of sodium borate conjugation buffer (100 mM, pH 8.5) and allowed to solvate for at least 24 hours. Then, 1 mg of Alexa Fluor 488 NHS Ester resuspended in 35 ml of DMSO was added to the solution and incubated overnight in the dark at room temperature with gentle agita-tion. The reaction mixture was dialyzed with a 6000-8000 MWCO RC membrane against saline (1000 ml x 4) and the retentate was flter sterilized. 
For conjugation with carboxyl latex beads 3 mm, mannan-DAP was resuspended at a concentration of 10 mg/1 ml of BupH MES conjugation buffer pH 4.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) and allowed to solvate for at least 24 hours. 1 ml of mannan-DAP was added to 50 x106 beads and then mixed with 4 mg/1 ml of EDC (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) resuspended in pure water. The reaction mixture was incubated for 4 hours in the dark at room temperature with gentle agitation. Then, the beads were washed twice (4000 g for 10 mi-nutes) with saline and resuspended in saline at a concentration of 108 beads/ml. 
Preparation of Candida albicans b-glucan particles 

b-glucan particles were isolated from Candida albicans SC5314 as previously described by our laboratory (Lowman et al., 2014). Briefy, glucan was isolated from C.albicans using a base/acid extraction approach with provides water insoluble glucan particles that are > 95% pure. The structure and purity of the glucan was determined by 1H-NMR in DMSO-d6 (Lowman et al., 2014). Prior to in vitro or in vivo use the b-glucan particles are depyrogenated and sterilized. 
Preparation of the diaminopropane (DAP) derivatized b-glucan 
b-glucan particles (20 mg) were dissolved in 1 ml of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in 4 ml vial after one hour of stirring. 1,3-Diaminopro-pane (100 mL) was added and stirred at ambient temperature for 3 hours. Sodium cyanoborohydride (100 mg) was added and the reaction mixture was stirred for 48 hours, followed by addition of sodium borohydride (50 mg) and stirring for 24 hours. Acetic acid (200 ml) was added dropwise at 0C to quench the reaction and the reaction mixture was stirred at ambient temperature for 3 hours. The b-glucan particles were harvested and washed fve times in water by centrifugation (862 g). The recovery was >95%. The glucan-DAP was characterized by 1H-NMR to confrm the derivatized glucan was still intact. The glucan-DAP was lyoph-ilized to dryness and stored at -20C in the dark in a desiccator until needed. 





Article 
For conjugation with Alexa Fluor 488 NHS Ester (Succinimidyl Ester), 20 mg of glucan-DAP were suspended in 1 ml of sodium borate conjugation buffer (100 mM, pH 8.5) and allowed to hydrate for at least 24 hours at 4C. 1 mg of Alexa Fluor 488 NHS Ester resuspended in 35 ml of DMSO was then added to the solution which was incubated overnight in the dark at room temperature with gentle agitation. The reaction mixture was centrifuged, washed fve times in water with centrifugation (862 g) and the 488 labeled glucan particles were harvested. 
Quanti.cation of mannans in the alum/mannans formulation 
Supernatants were harvested from the alum/mannans mixture and were lyophilized. Lyophilized supernatants and a standard mannan sample (4.0 mg) that was not mixed with AH were respectively dissolved in 500 ml of deuterium oxide (99.9% D) with 0.01% (W/V) internal standard TMSP-2,2,3,3-D4 (98.0% D). 1H-NMR data were collected on a 400MHz Bruker Avance Ultra Shield NMR spectrometer at 295 K with the same acquisition parameters for all the samples. NMR spectra were processed using TOPSPIN 
2.1 running on the Avance 400MHz NMR. The ring proton resonances (3.25 -4.50 ppm) were integrated referencing to the integral of internal standard (-0.02 -0.02 ppm) calibrated as 1.0. Based on the ratio between the mass of standard mannan (4.0 mg) and its ring proton integral (39.12), the mass of mannan in the supernatant was calculated using the detected ring proton integral multiplied by 4.0/39.2. Thus, the amount of mannan absorbed by the AH was determined by difference between the mass of total mannan added and the mass of mannan remaining in the supernatant after formulation. 
Analysis of skin and LN responses 
To assess skin and LN innate responses, mice were injected intradermally on day 0 with the indicated compounds in a volume of 50 ml on each side of the back (one side for the compound and the contralateral side for saline of vehicle control). 6 or 24 hours post-in-jection skin samples at the injection sites and draining (brachial) LNs were collected for subsequent analysis. In selected experiment LNs were also collected 7 and 14 days post-injection. 
Skin samples were transferred to a tissue homogenizer and disrupted with beads in 1 ml of TRI Reagent (Zymo Research). Then, samples were centrifuged 12000 g for 10 minutes and 800 ml of cleared supernatant were transferred to a new tube for subsequent RNA isolation. 
LNs were weighted on an analytical scale prior to transfer to a tissue homogenizer and disrupted with beads in TRI Reagent as indicated for skin samples or processed to generate a LN cell suspension by modifcation of a previously published protocol (Fletcher et al., 2011). Briefy, individual LNs were incubated at 37C for 20 minutes in 400 ml of digestion mix (IMDM + pen/strep + FBS 2% + collagenase 100 mg/ml + dispase II 100 mg/ml + DNase 10 mg/ml). Then, LNs were ground by pipetting with a 1000 ml tip, super-natants were transferred to new tubes and kept at 4C while 200 ml of digestion mix were added to the pellets and incubated at 37C for 10 minutes. This cycle was repeated one more time, then pooled supernatants of individual LNs were divided into two al-iquots: one for fow cytometry analysis, another one was centrifuged at 300 g for 5 minutes and the cell pellet was resuspended in 800 ml of TRI Reagent for subsequent RNA isolation. In selected experiment LN suspensions were cultured in the presence of Bre-feldin A (BioLegend) for 4 hours and then processed for fow cytometry analysis (both surface staining and intracellular cytokine staining). 
For specifc experiments mice were treated with: anti-CD62L blocking antibody or isotype control, intravenous injections on day -1; anti-IFNg and anti-IFNAR1 blocking antibody or isotype controls, intravenous injections on day -1 and 0; anti-Asialo-GM1 or PBS, intravenous injections on day -1 and 0; anti-Ly6G depleting antibody or isotype control, intraperitoneal injections on day -1 and 0; diphtheria toxin, intravenous injections on day -1 and intradermal injections (co-injected with mannans) on day 0 for CD11c-DTR mice, intraperitoneal injection on day -2 for CD169-DTR mice. 
In vitro stimulation of GM-CSF-differentiated, bone marrow-derived phagocytes 
Bone marrow-derived phagocytes were differentiated from murine bone marrow in IMDM + 10% B16-GM-CSF derived supernatant + 10% FBS + pen/strep + L-Gln and used after 7 days of culture. Then, cells were harvested, plated in fat bottom 96 well plates at a density of 105 cells/200 ml/well in IMDM + 10% FBS + pen/strep + L-Gln and stimulated with the indicated compounds for 18-21 hours. At the end of stimulation, supernatants were harvested, and TNF and IL-2 concentrations were measured by ELISA (Bio-Legend) according to the manufacturer＊s protocol. Cells were detached with PBS + EDTA 2 mM and transferred to a round bottom 96 well plate for subsequent fow cytometry staining and analysis. Alternatively, cells were stimulated for 6 hours, lysed in TRI Re-agent and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis. 
In vivo quanti.cation of .uorescently labelled b-glucans and mannans 
Mice were intradermally injected with 500 mg/mouse of Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated b-glucans and mannans (in selected experi-ments mannans were formulated with 100 mg/mouse of AH before injection). At the indicated timepoints dLNs were collected, transferred to a tissue homogenizer and disrupted with beads in 400 ml of deionized water. Then, samples were centrifuged (12000 g for 10 minutes) and cleared supernatants were transferred to a 96 well clear bottom black plate. Fluorescence values were measured with SpectraMax i3x microplate reader (Molecular Devices) and expressed as arbitrary units after background (deionized water) subtraction. 





Article 
Flow cytometry, .uorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), imaging cytometry and confocal microscopy 
For fow cytometry analysis, cells were frst stained with Zombie Red Fixable Viability in PBS for 5 minutes at 4C, washed once with PBS + BSA 0.2% + NaN3 0.05% (300 g for 5 minutes) and then stained with antibodies against surface antigens diluted in PBS + BSA 0.2% + NaN3 0.05% for 20 minutes at 4C. Cells were then washed, fxed with 2% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at room tem-perature, washed again and resuspended in PBS + BSA 0.2% + NaN3 0.05%. Samples were acquired on a BD LSRFortessa fow cytometer and data were analyzed using FlowJo v.10 software (BD Biosciences). CountBright Absolute Counting Beads were used to quantify absolute cell numbers. In selected experiments, after fxation with 2% paraformaldehyde cells were permeabilized by incubation with a saponin-based permeabilization buffer (BioLegend) for 10 minutes at 4C and stained with antibodies against intracellular cytokines diluted in permeabilization buffer for 20 minutes at 4C. Then, cells were washed with permeabilization buffer, resuspended in PBS + BSA 0.2% + NaN3 0.05% and acquired as indicated before. 
For FACS and imaging cytometry, mice were intradermally injected with AF488-mannans and 6 hours later dLNs were harvested to obtain LN cell suspensions. For FACS, cells were stained with antibodies against surface antigens diluted in PBS + BSA 0.2% for 20 minutes at 4C. Cells were then washed once, resuspended in 1 ml of PBS + BSA 0.2%, fltered through 70 mm cell strainers (Fisher Scientifc) and sorted with a Sony MA900 cell sorter directly into 1 ml of TRI Reagent. The following cell subset was sorted: CD3 -CD19-NK1.1-Ter119-CD45+ AF488-mannan+ Ly6G-(CD11b+ Ly6C+)-CD11b+ CD11c+. For imaging cytometry, cells were depleted of lymphoid and erythroid cells by sequential staining with biotinylated antibodies against anti-CD3, anti-CD19, anti-NK1.1, anti-Ter119 and Streptavidin Microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer＊s protocol. The remaining cells were stained with anti-CD45 APC, fxed with 2% paraformaldehyde, washed once and resuspended in 60 ml of PBS + DAPI (0.2 mg/ml). Samples were then acquired on an Amnis ImageStream X Mark II (Luminex Corporation). Mannan internalization was analyzed with Amnis Ideas Software and calculated with Internalization Feature as AF488 signal within the APC mask. 
For confocal microscopy, dLNs were isolated at steady state or 1 hour post-injection of AF488-mannans and fxed with 4% para-formaldehyde overnight. Tissue slides were prepared from frozen LN samples at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC) Histology Core Facility and stained at the BIDMC Confocal Imaging Core Facility. Briefy, frozen sections were air-dried for 30 minutes and rehydrated. The sections were permeabilized using 0.05% Triton X-100 for 10 minutes at room temperature and washed three times with TBS. The sections were then incubated with 5% normal donkey serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch Lab) for 1 hour at room 
 

temperature. For Dectin-2 staining of steady state LNs, slides were incubated with rat anti-Dectin-2 overnight at 4 C. The slides were washed three times and incubated with: Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated Donkey anti-rat secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch Lab) for 90 minutes at room temperature and washed four times. Slides were then incubated with Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated rat anti-CD169 primary antibody and Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated rat anti-CD45R/B220 primary antibody for 90 minutes at room temperature and then washed with TBS. For phospho-Syk staining of AF488-mannan-treated LNs, slides were incubated with rabbit anti-phos-
 

pho-Syk (Cell Signaling Technology) overnight at 4 C. The slides were washed three times and incubated with Alexa Fluor 647-con-jugated Donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch Lab) for 90 minutes at room temperature and washed four times. Slides were then incubated with Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated rat anti-CD45R/B220 primary antibody for 90 minutes at room temperature and then washed with TBS. rabbit anti-phospho-Syk (Cell Signaling Technology). Samples were counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) and washed three times with TBS. Slides were mounted with Prolong Gold anti-fade mounting media (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) and imaged on a Zeiss 880 laser scanning confocal microscope at the Boston Children＊s Hospital Harvard Digestive Disease Center. 
RNA isolation, qPCR, transcriptomic and pathway analyses 
RNA was isolated from TRI Reagent samples using phenol-chloroform extraction or column-based extraction systems (Direct-zol RNA Microprep and Miniprep, Zymo Research) according to the manufacturer＊s protocol. RNA concentration and purity (260/280 and 260/230 ratios) were measured by NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientifc). 
Purifed RNA was analyzed for gene expression by qPCR on a CFX384 real time cycler (Bio-rad) using pre-designed KiCqStart SYBR Green Primers (MilliporeSigma) specifc for Cxcl9 (M_Cxcl9_1), Gbp2 (M_Gpb2_1), I.t2 (M_Ift2_1), Rsad2 (M_Rsad2_1), Il6 (M_Il6_1), Cxcl1 (M_Cxcl1_1), Rpl13a (M_Rpl13a_1) or pre-designed PrimeTime qPCR Primers (Integrated DNA Technologies) spe-cifc for Gapdh (Mm.PT.39a.1). 
For bulk RNAseq analysis, RNA isolated from skin or LN samples was submitted to Genewiz. RNA samples were quantifed using Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) and RNA integrity was checked with RNA Screen Tape on Agilent 2200 TapeStation (Agilent Technologies). RNA sequencing library preparation was prepared using TruSeq Stranded mRNA library Prep kit following manufacturer＊s protocol (Illumina, Cat# RS-122-2101). Briefy, mRNAs were frst enriched with Oligod(T) beads. Enriched mRNAs were fragmented for 8 minutes at 94C. First strand and second strand cDNA were subsequently synthesized. The second strand of cDNA was marked by incorporating dUTP during the synthesis. cDNA fragments were adenylated at 3＊ends, and indexed adapter was ligated to cDNA fragments. Limited cycle PCR was used for library enrichment. The incorporated dUTP in second strand cDNA quenched the amplifcation of second strand, which helped to preserve the strand specifcity. Sequencing libraries were validated using DNA Analysis Screen Tape on the Agilent 2200 TapeStation (Agilent Technologies), and quantifed by using Qubit 2.0 Fluorom-eter (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) as well as by quantitative PCR (Applied Biosystems). The sequencing libraries were multiplexed and clustered on 1 lane of fowcell. After clustering, the fowcell was loaded on the Illumina HiSeq instrument according to manufacturer＊s instructions. The samples were sequenced using a 2x150 Pair-End (PE) High Output confguration. Image analysis and base calling 





Article 
were conducted by the HiSeq Control Software (HCS) on the HiSeq instrument. Raw sequence data (.bcl fles) generated from Illu-mina HiSeq was converted into fastq fles and de-multiplexed using Illumina bcl2fastq program version 2.17. One mismatch was allowed for index sequence identifcation. Reads were quality-controlled using FastQC. Illumina adapters were removed using cu-tadapt. Trimmed reads were mapped to the mouse transcriptome (GRCm38) based on Ensembl annotations using Kallisto (Bray et al., 2016). Transcript counts were imported and aggregated to gene counts using tximport (Soneson et al., 2015). Gene counts were analyzed using the R package DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014). When applicable, batch was used as a blocking factor in the statistical model. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identifed as those passing a threshold of FDR signifcance threshold (0.05 for skin; 0.01 for lymph nodes, a more stringent threshold thanks to the greater power due to higher number of replicates) where the alternate hypothesis was that the absolute log2 FC was greater than 0. Genes induced by mannan or glucan treatment over saline were plotted in heatmaps using the R package ComplexHeatmap, using Z-scored log2 normalized abundance. Genes were arranged by abundance delta between glucan and mannan (aggregated from multiple time points when appropriate), with a gap delimiting two clusters: genes more highly expressed upon mannan stimulation vs genes more highly expressed upon glucan stimulation. Pathway analysis was performed with the R package hypeR (Federico and Monti, 2020), using hypergeometric enrichment tests of genes belonging to a cluster of interest and the Hallmark gene set collection from the Broad Institute＊s MSigDB collection. 
For targeted transcriptome sequencing, 25 ng of RNA isolated from sorted cells was retrotranscribed to cDNA using SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientifc). Barcoded libraries were prepared using the Ion AmpliSeq Transcriptome Mouse Gene Expression Kit as per the manufacturer＊s protocol and sequenced using an Ion S5 system (Thermo Fisher Scientifc). Differen-tial gene expression analysis was performed using the ampliSeqRNA plugin (Thermo Fisher Scientifc). To quantify the number of DEGs, gene-level fold change < -1.5 or > 1.5 and gene-level p value < 0.05 (ANOVA) were considered. For heatmap representation, DEGs were defned with an F-test FDR less than 0.05 and a log2 fold-change (FC) greater than 1 (or lower than -1) between a mutant and WT control. Hierarchical clustering was performed with Pearson correlation and average linkage. Pathway analysis was per-formed with the R package hypeR, using Kolmogorov Smirnov Test on genes ranked according to their log2FC. 
In vivo CD4+ and CD8+ T cell proliferation assay 
Spleens were isolated from OT-II or OT-I mice and meshed with the plunger end of a syringe. Then, splenocyte cell suspensions were treated with ACK lysis buffer (2 ml for 2 minutes at room temperature), washed with PBS (300 g for 5 minutes) and fltered through 70 mm cell strainers. CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were respectively purifed using CD4 (L3T4) or CD8a (Ly-2) MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer＊s protocol and stained with CellTrace CFSE (5 mM in PBS + FBS 2.5% for 20 minutes in the dark). At the end of incubation, cells were washed twice with PBS, resuspended at a concentration of 5 x 105 cells/100 ml saline and 100 ml of cell suspension was intravenously injected into each mouse. 24 hours later (day 0) mice were intradermally injected with OVA (5 mg/mouse) alone or combined with mannans (500 mg/mouse). Saline-injected mice were used as control. On day +3 dLNs were harvested and LN cell suspension were stained with anti-CD19, anti-Ter119, anti-CD3 and anti-CD4 or anti-CD8 antibodies. Adop-tively transferred, CFSE-labelled OT-II and OT-I cells were respectively detected in the CD19 -Ter119-CD3+ CD4+ and CD19 -Ter119-CD3+ CD8+ gates. Results are expressed as absolute number of CD19 -Ter119-CD3+ CD4+ CFSElo or CD19-Ter119-CD3+ CD8+ CFSElo cells (i.e., cells undergoing at least one division cycle) or percentage of each division peak within the CD19 -Ter119-CD3+ CD4+ or CD19-Ter119-CD3+ CD8+ gates. 
SARS-CoV-2 Spike and RBD expression and puri.cation 
Full length SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein and RBD constructs (amino acid residues R319-K529), both with an HRV3C protease cleavage site, a TwinStrepTag and an 8XHisTag at C-terminus, were obtained from Drs. Barney S. Graham (NIH Vaccine Research Center) and Aaron G. Schmidt (Ragon Institute), respectively. These expression vectors were used to transiently transfect Expi293 cells (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) using polyethylenimine (Polysciences). Protein was purifed from fltered cell supernatants using either StrepTactin resin (IBA) or Cobalt-TALON resin (Takara). Affnity tags were cleaved off from eluted protein samples by HRV3C prote-ase and tag removed proteins were subjected to additional purifcation by size-exclusion chromatography using either a Superose 6 10/300 column (GE Healthcare) or a Superdex 75 10/300 Increase column (GE Healthcare) in PBS (pH 7.4) buffer. 
Immunization and antibody quanti.cation 
CB6F1 mice were immunized by intradermal injection of Spike (1 mg/mouse) alone or formulated with AH (100 mg/mouse), b-glucans (500 mg/mouse), mannans(500 mg/mouse), alum (AH)/mannans (AH/mann), AddaS03 or AH/PHAD on day 0 and day +14.Alternatively, C57BL/6 mice were immunized by intradermal injection Flublok vaccine (1 mg/mouse) alone or formulated with AH, AH/mann, Adda-Vax or AH/PHAD on day 0 and day +14. Saline-injected mice were used as control. Blood samples were collected by retroorbital bleeding on day +14 (pre-boost) and day +28, and serum samples were isolated after centrifugation of blood samples twice at 1500 g for 10 minutes. In selected experiments blood samples were collected on day +98 or 7 days post-challenge. Spike-, RBD-, Flublok-and rPR8-specifc IgG, IgG1, IgG2c antibody levels were quantifed in serum samples by ELISA by modifcation of a previ-ously described protocol (Borriello et al., 2017). Briefy, high binding fat bottom 96-well plates were coated with 0.5 mg/ml Spike, 1 mg/ml RBD, 1 mg/ml Flublok or 1 mg/ml rPR8 in PBS, incubated overnight at 4C, washed once with PBS + 0.05% Tween-20 (PBST) and blocked with PBS + BSA 1% for 1 hour at room temperature. Then, serum samples were added with an initial dilution of 1:100 and 1:4 serial dilutions in PBS + BSA 1% to generate 11-point curves and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. Plates 





Article 
were then washed three times with PBST and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG, IgG1 or IgG2c (Southern Biotech) antibodies. At the end of the incubation, plates were washed fve times with PBST and developed with tet-ramethylbenzidine (BD OptEIA Substrate Solution for Spike, rHA, and rPR8; Thermo Fisher Scientifc 1-Step Ultra TMB-ELISA Sub-strate Solution for RBD ELISA) for 5 min, then stopped with 2 N H2SO4. Optical densities (ODs) were read at 450 nm with SpectraMax iD3x microplate reader (Molecular Devices) and endpoint titers were calculated using as cutoff three times the optical density of the background. Values < 100 were reported as 25. 
Splenocyte restimulation assay 

Immunized mice were sacrifced on day 35 and their spleens were collected. To isolate splenocytes, spleens were mashed through a 70 mm cell strainer and the resulting cell suspensions were washed with PBS and incubated with ACK lysis buffer (2 ml for 2 minutes at room temperature) to lyse erythrocytes. Splenocytes were re-washed with PBS and plated in fat bottom 96-well plates (2 x 106 cells per well). Then, SARS-CoV-2 Spike peptides (PepTivator SARS-CoV-2 Prot_S, Miltenyi Biotec) were added at a fnal concentration of 
0.6 nmol/ml (total cell culture volume, 200 ml per well). After 96 hours, supernatants were harvested and IFNg levels were measured by ELISA (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) according to the manufacturer＊s protocol. 
SARS-CoV-2 surrogate virus neutralization tests 

The surrogate virus neutralization test was performed by modifcation of a previously published protocol (Tan et al., 2020). Briefy, high binding fat bottom 96-well plates were coated with 2 mg/ml recombinant human ACE2 (hACE2, MilliporeSigma) in PBS, incu-bated overnight at 4C, washed three times with PBST and blocked with PBS + BSA 1% for 1 hour at room temperature. In the mean-time, each serum sample (fnal dilution 1:160) was pre-incubated with 3 ng of RBD-Fc (R&D Systems) in PBS + BSA 1% for 1 hour at room temperature and then transferred to the hACE2-coated plate. As positive control, RBD-Fc was also added to hACE2-coated wells without pre-incubation with serum samples. After 1 hour at room temperature, plates were washed three times with PBST and incubated with an HRP-conjugated anti-human IgG Fc antibody (Southern Biotech) for 1 hour at room temperature. At the end of the incubation, plates were washed fve times with PBST and developed with tetramethylbenzidine (BD Biosciences) for 5 min, then stopped with 2 N H2SO4. The optical density was read at 450 nm with SpectraMax iD3x microplate reader (Molecular Devices). Per-centage inhibition of RBD binding to hACE2 was calculated with the following formula: Inhibition (%) = [1 -(Sample OD value -Back-ground OD value) / (Control OD value -Background OD value)] x 100. 
SARS-CoV-2 Neutralization Titer Determination 

All serum samples were heat inactivated at 56C for 30 minutes to deactivate complement and allowed to equilibrate to room tem-perature prior to processing for neutralization titer. Samples were diluted in duplicate to an initial dilution of 1:5 or 1:10 followed by 1:2 serial dilutions, resulting in a 12-dilution series with each well containing 100 ml. All dilutions were performed in DMEM (Quality Bio-logical), supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (heat inactivated, MilliporeSigma), 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin (Gemini Bio-products) and 1% (v/v) L-glutamine (2 mM fnal concentration, Thermo Fisher Scientifc). Dilution plates were then transported into the BSL-3 laboratory and 100 ml of diluted SARS-CoV-2 (WA-1, courtesy of Dr. Natalie Thornburg/CDC) inoculum was added to each well to result in a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 upon transfer to titering plates. A non-treated, virus-only control and a mock infection control were included on every plate. The sample/virus mixture was then incubated at 37C (5.0% CO2) for 1 hour before transferring to 96-well titer plates with confuent VeroE6 cells. Titer plates were incubated at 37C (5.0% CO2) for 72 hours, followed by cytopathic effect (CPE) determination for each well in the plate. The frst sample dilution to show CPE was reported as the minimum sample dilution required to neutralize >99% of the concentration of SARS-CoV-2 tested (neut99). 
VirScan 

We performed phage IP and sequencing as described previously (Xu et al., 2015a) with slight modifcations. A sublibrary encoding a 56-mer peptide library tiling every 28 amino acids through the proteomes of the six HCoVs and three bat coronaviruses most closely related to SARS-CoV-2 (Shrock et al., 2020) was mixed with the original VirScan library to enable mapping of SARS-CoV-2 epitopes. 
0.6 ml mouse sera, or approximately 2 mg of IgG, was included in each VirScan reaction. Immunoprecipitations were performed using magnetic protein A and protein G Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) as previously described (Xu et al., 2015a). 
SARS-CoV-2 challenge and lung viral titer determination 

Mice were anesthetized with intraperitoneal injection of ketamine/xylazine prior to intranasal inoculation with 1x104 pfu MA-10 (Leist et al., 2020) per mouse in 50mL PBS. Weights were measured daily starting from the day of inoculation (Day 0) to the day of eutha-nization (Day 2). Two days post-infection, mice were euthanized with isofurane and dissected. The entire left lung was fxed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for histology and the right lung was halved and stored in either TRIzol for RNA isolation or PBS for titering by plaque assay. 
SARS-CoV-2 Plaque Assay 

The day prior to infection, 2x105 VeroE6 cells (ATCC, CRL-1586) were seeded per well in 12-well plates. Lung samples were homog-enized and then 25mL of each sample was serially diluted 1:10 in 225mL DMEM. Media was removed from the cells and 200mL of each 





Article 
dilution was added to each well. The plates were incubated at 37C and 5% CO2 for one hour, rocking every 15 minutes. The cells were then overlaid with 2mL of a semi-solid agar overlay (DMEM+2%FBS+0.05% w/v Ultra Pure Agarose (Invitrogen, A9539). Plates were incubated at 37C and 5% CO2 for 72 hours before being fxed with 4% PFA and stained with a 0.25% w/v crystal violet + 20% Ethanol solution. Plaques were counted and titers calculated. 
In.uenza A virus challenge and lung pathology 
C57BL/6 mice were anesthetized by isofurane before intranasally inoculated with 50 mlof4 x 103 plaque-forming units (PFU) of infu-enza virus A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1). Mice were monitored daily and the body weights were recorded for 7 days. On day 7 post-infection mice were sacrifced and lungs were collected for histological analysis. 
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
When necessary, data were Log-transformed before statistical analysis to approximate normal distributions. One-sample t test was used to compare each group against the value 1 (or 0 after Log-transformation, which represent the contralateral control sample ex-pressed as fold). Statistical differences between groups in datasets with one categorical variable were evaluated by two sample t test (2 groups) or one-way ANOVA (more than 2 groups) corrected for multiple comparisons. Statistical differences between groups in datasets with two categorical variables were evaluated by two-way ANOVA corrected for multiple comparisons. # or * and ** or ## respectively indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01. 




ll 
Article 


Supplemental .gures 
A 

70
16000 
CD86 MFI (CD11c+ CD86+) 

## #### ## 
12000 
50 
## ## 

8000 
30 
4000 


C 1.5 
TNF (ng/ml)
1.0 
0.5 


D 
TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKF 
B INFLAMMATA ORRY_RESPONSE INTERFERON_GAMMA_RESPONSE ALLOGRAFT_REJECTION IL6_JAK_STAT3_SIGNALINA 
G MYC_TARGETS_VT 1 INTERFERON_ALPHA_RESPONSE IL2_STAT5_SIGNALINA G HYPOXIA KRAS_SIGNALING_UP COMPLEMENT P53_PATHA 
WAW Y APOPTOSIS EPITHELIAL_MESENCHYMAL_TRANSITION ANGIOGENESIS 




1e-18 1e-42 1e-66 1e-90 FDR 
(legend on next page) 

ll 


Article 
Figure S1. Mannans and b-glucans exhibit different diameters and in.ammatory properties, related to Figure 
1 

(A) 
Hydrodynamic diameters of mannan (Mann) and b-glucan (b-gluc) preparations were measured by dynamic light scattering. Results from one representative experiment are shown. (B and C) GM-CSF differentiated, bone marrow-derived phagocytes were generated from WT (B, C), Clec7a/ , Clec4n/ , and Fcer1g/ mice (C) and stim-ulated with LPS, curdlan, b-glucans (b-gluc), soluble mannans (Mann) (B, C), uncoated microbeads (B only) and microbeads covalently linked to mannans (B:mann) (C). After 18每21 h, supernatants were collected and TNF and IL-2 concentrations measured by ELISA, while cells were harvested and expression levels of CD86 and OX40L were measured by fow cytometry. n = 4每6 independent experiments. ## indicate p % 0.01 when comparing each group against its untreated control (CTRL). Results are shown as mean +SEM. 

(D) 
Pathway enrichment analysis of genes belonging to the cluster upregulated by b-glucans as depicted in Figure 1B. 




ll 

Article 
AB C 


-1.5 
107 
1 
107 



+ 
** ** 

8 
106 6 
106 4 
106 

# CD45+ / LN

# B cells / LN
# T cells / LN
**
1 
107 












# Ly6G- CD11b+Ly6C+ 

DE FGH
60000 
600000 
500000 
200000 
90
-
-
-
# + 
0 
0 
30 



** -
# Ly6G-(CD11b+
 CD11c+)
** 1500 
1250 
1000 
750 
+ ** 


+
# 
+ 
# Ly6G- CD11c+ MHCII+
## 
# viable IFN 
+ cells / LN # CD11b+Ly6G+ / LN
400000 ** 
150000 
75 
40000 
400000 300000 100000 

60
** 
200000 
20000 200000 
** 
50000 
45
**
100000 

* Sal MannMann 














30 
##100000 40000 6000 
10 

30000 
20 
## 
50000 20000 4000 
5
10 

10000 
0 

0 










N 
*
** 
* 
4 

8 

8 
5 

##
*
## 
##
LN weight (fold over sal.)

##

B cells (fold over sal.)
T cells (fold over sal.)CD45+ (fold over sal.)

4
##
3 
6 
6 

#### ## 


3 


2 
4 
4 
2 
1 
2 
2 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 




Figure S2. Mannans and b-glucans induce unique patterns of immune cell recruitment and activation in the dLNs, related to Figure 
1 

(A每H) Mice were injected intradermally with saline (black plots), mannans (Mann, red plots), or b-glucans (b-gluc, red plots). 6 or 24 h later, dLNs were collected and analyzed by fow cytometry for absolute numbers (A-G) or CD86 expression (H) of the indicated populations. N = 5每6 mice per group. (I每K) Mice were injected intradermally with saline (Sal) or mannans (Mann). 24 h later dLNs were collected and analyzed for absolute numbers of total IFNg + cells (I) or the indicated cell populations among CD45+ cells (J). Levels of IFNg production in CD8+ T cells or NK cells were evaluated by measuring the MFI of IFNg among IFNg-expressing cells (K). (L每N) WT mice were treated on day 1 and 0 with the same volumes of PBS or a depleting anti-Asialo GM1 antibody (aAsGM1) (L, N), or WT and Batf3/ mice (M) were injected intradermally on day 0 with saline or mannans. 24 h later dLNs were collected, and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis (L, M), or dLNs were weighted and analyzed by fow cytometry for absolute numbers of the indicated populations (N). Results are expressed as fold over contralateral, 
(legend continued on next page) 

ll 




Article 
saline-injected LN. N = 4每5 mice per group. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing between treatments (Mann versus b-gluc, A每H) or each group against the value 1 (which represent the contralateral control sample expressed as fold, L and M). * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing between treatments (Mann, b-gluc) and their respective saline controls (A每H), or between the indicated experimental groups (K, L). 




Article 
Skin - 24h LN-24h 
AB
Skin - 24 h Il6 Cxcl1 LN weight Cxcl9 Gbp2 Ifit2 Rsad2 100 
100 
150
**3 6 8 15 
10
* ***No lesion *# ######** ## 

## 
8
Abscess 80 # 
6 
0 
0 
0 
0
WGP-DWGP-S WGP-DWGP-S WGP-D
WGP-S WGP-D
WGP-S 
Fold over sal.
2 
10
4 
##
## 
0 
0
WGP-D
WGP-S WGP-D
WGP-S WGP-D
WGP-S 
Fold over sal.
100

Abscess 
#
60 
6
% mice
##
+ skin lesion
50 
4 
40 
4
50 
1 
5
2 
2
20 
2 
## 
0 
0 
Figure S3. Soluble whole glucan particles elicit LN expansion and ISG expression, related to Figure 
1 

(A and B) Mice were injected intradermally with saline (Sal), dispersible (WGP-D) or soluble (WGP-S) whole glucan particles. 24 h later injection sites were as-sessed as indicated in Figure 1A (A), skin samples and dLNs were collected, LN weights were measured, and RNA extracted for gene expression analysis (B). Results are expressed as fold over the median value of saline-injected skin samples or LNs. N = 4 mice per group. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 
0.01 when comparing each group against the value 1 (which represent the saline control samples expressed as fold). * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 
0.01 when comparing between different experimental groups. 



ll 



Article 
WT vs Fcer1gg-/ 
TNFFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKF 
INTERFERON_GAMMA_RESPONSE INTERFERON_ALPHA_RESPONSE KRAS_SIGNALING_DN 
INFLAMMATA 
ORRY_RESPONS 
EPITHELIAL_MESENCHYMAL_TRANSITION ESTROGEN_RESPONSE_LAL TA 
MYOGENESIS CHOLESTEROL_HOMEOSTASI
HYPOXIA APOPTOSIS IL2_STAT5_SIGNALINA 

ESTROGEN_RESPONSE_EARLLY 
ANGIOGENESIS APICAL_JUNCTION 

Pathway analysis of genes signifcantly induced in WT compared with Fcer1g/ mice as depicted in Figure 3B. 




Article 

Figure 
5 

(A) Soluble mannans (Mann), AH and the formulation of alum (AH) and mannans (AH/mann) were incubated at room temperature for 30 min, then spun down and the supernatants were collected for 1H-nuclear magnetic resonance quantifcation of unbound mannans. The reaction contained an excess of mannan. The results indicate that the mannan absorption capacity of AH is approximately two times its mass in this formulation strategy. Results are expressed as percentage of soluble mannans and shown as mean + SD. (B每I) GM-CSF differentiated, bone marrow-derived phagocytes were generated from WT or the indicated knockout mice and stimulated with alum (AH), mannans (Mann), AH/mannans (AH/mann). After 18每21 h supernatants were collected, and TNF and IL-2 protein concentrations were measured by ELISA (B, C). Cells were harvested and expression levels of CD86 and OX40L were measured by fow cytometry (D, E). Alternatively, cells were stimulated for 6 h, and RNA was extracted for gene expression analysis. Results are reported as relative expression compared with Rpl13a (F-I). n = 3 (A) or 4 (B, I) independent experiments. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing the same genotype across treatments. * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing the same treatment across genotypes. Comparisons are indicated by the color code. 

ll 



Article 

S/AH 

S/AH/mann 
A BCD E
Splen. restim. 105 
12
107 
107 
** **** 
## ## ## 
*
106 
106 
## ## 
Day 98 * 
#### 
Day 98 
107 106 105
Anti-Spike IgG1
104 8
105 
105
Anti-Spike IgG2c
104 
103 
104 
104 
4
103 
103 
103 
102 102 
102 
102 101 
0
101 
Anti-Spike IgG
Sal Sal 
WTWT-/-WTWT-/-S/AH 
S/AHS/AH/mann S/AH/mann 

F GHI J 
Splen. restim. 
IFN (ng/ml)
Anti-Spike IgG 



Anti-Spike IgG 
107 
107 
107 
107 
Anti-Spike IgG
Anti-Spike IgG 
5 

Anti-Spike IgG 
* 
# 
102 
102 
102 
102 
0 


* 
106 
* 106
106 
106
**
4 

#### ### #

105 
105 
105 
105 

3 

104 
104 
104 
104 
2 
103 
103 
103 
103 
1 



Figure S6. B and T cell responses activated by immunization with SARS-CoV-2 Spike formulated with alum/mannans have the same cellular and molecular requirements of the LN innate response elicited by alum/mannans, related to Figure 
6 

(A每I) WT mice, transgenic mice, or WT mice, treated on day 1, 0, 13, and 14 with blocking anti-IFNAR plus anti-IFNg (aIFNAR/IFNg) antibodies or the same doses of isotype control antibodies (Iso CTRL), were injected intradermally with pre-fusion stabilized SARS-CoV-2 trimer combined with alum (AH) (S/AH) or AH/mannans (S/AH/mann) on day 0 (prime) and day 14 (boost). Serum samples were collected on day 28 (B每I) or on day 98 (A, WT mice) to assess anti-Spike antibody levels. In selected experiments (C, E), mice were sacrifced on day 35 to collect spleens and isolate splenocytes for in vitro restimulation with Spike peptides. After 96 h supernatants were collected and IFNg protein levels were measured by ELISA (F). N = 4每7 mice per group. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing S/AH and S/AH/mann versus Sal (A, B) or S/AH/mann versus S/AH (C每I). * and **, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01 when comparing S/AH/mann versus S/AH (A, B) or S/AH/mann across treatments or genotypes (C每I). Comparisons are indicated by the color code. 


ll 


Article 

A B 
C 
D
4
10 
3
10
Anti-rPR8 IgG 
SARS-CoV-2 neut. titer 
150  
100  #  ## ##  ## ##  ## ##  
50  
0  

6
5
10 
## ##
5 
4
##
10 
## ## 
## ## 
3
4
10 
## 
2
3
10 1 
2
10 0 
SalrHArHA/AH
rHA/AH/mannrHA/AddaVax
rHA/AH/PHAD 
Figure S7. The adjuvant formulation of mannans and alum confers protection against lung viral infections, related to Figure 
7 

(A and B) Mice were injected intradermally with saline (Sal), pre-fusion stabilized SARS-CoV-2 trimer alone (S) or combined with alum (AH) (S/AH), AH/mannans (S/AH/mann), AddaS03 (S/AddaS03), or AH/PHAD (S/AH/PHAD) on day 0 (prime) and day 14 (boost). Serum samples were collected on day 28 to assess SARS-CoV-2 surrogate virus neutralization test (A) and neutralization titer (B). N = 4每5 mice per group. (C and D) Mice wereinjected intradermally withsaline (Sal), Flublok alone (rHA) or combined with AH(rHA/AH), AH/mannans (rHA/AH/mann), AddaVax (rHA/AddaVax), or AH/PHAD (rHA/AH/PHAD) on day 0 (prime) and day 14 (boost). On day 35, mice were intranasally infected with IAV A/PR/8/1934. On day 42, serum samples were collected to assess anti-IAV A/PR/8/1934 recombinant hemagglutinin (Anti-rPR8)levels (C). Histology score of lungimages collected asin Figure 7F(D). N =5mice per group. # and ##, respectively, indicate p % 0.05 and 0.01. Comparisons are indicated by the color code. 
Histological score 
% hACE2/RBD inhib. 
2
10 
1
10 



