A Benchmark Distribution System for Investigation of Residential Microgrids With Multiple Local Generation and Storage Devices

ABSTRACT A benchmark distribution system is developed for investigating control and energy management of distributed generation (DG) at a residential level in the form of three single-phase microgrids. The
benchmark is derived from a typical distribution network architecture with common parameters found in
North-America systems including wiring specifications, line impedances and connection details for rooftop
PV systems. This benchmark system can accommodate microgrids operating in both grid-connected and
islanded modes. Within this benchmark, multiple single-phase DG sources located in different phases can be
coordinated to form a dynamically balanced three phase system under different load and generation profiles
in different phases. The coordination of DG sources in a particular phase is achieved through an intra-phase
power management device, while mitigating loads and generation imbalance among all phases are done by an
inter-phase power management scheme. It is expected that this benchmark system will facilitate investigation
of impacts posed by proliferation of single-phase distributed generation devices and local storage systems in
private residences. Three case studies have been carried out to demonstrate the versatility and effectiveness
of this benchmark system.


I. INTRODUCTION
AS PROLIFERATION of roof-top PV systems and
household energy storage units at residential setting
continues, the landscape of distribution systems is changing rapidly [1]. A modern distribution system in a residential neighborhood has to be able to accommodate multiple
embedded generation and energy storage units [2], [3] in both
single- or three-phase configurations. In fact, these local generation and storage capacities allow a group of such devices to
be connected together to form a single- or three-phase microgrid to supply local loads. Such systems can operate in either
a grid-connected or an islanded modes [4], [5]. This rapidly
evolving trend has forced local utility companies to carry
out extensive planning, load-forecasting, for both steady state
and dynamic capacity studies, and reliability assessment of
their distribution system infrastructure [6]. Needless to say,
to carry out such studies, it is imperative to have a more
detailed realistic model to capture ever-changing landscape
in distribution systems.
Even though the subject of distribution systems is wellstudied, however, most are focusing on steady state analysis and network reconfiguration in a multi-bus environment
[7]–[9]. Since distributed generation is dynamic in nature,
often affected by environmental conditions, power management and control studies have to consider transient behaviors
of the system at a low voltage (LV) residential settings. Often,
a family-owned roof-top PV systems and battery-based storage units are connected to form a residential microgrid
connecting to a primary feeder on a single phase. In this
respect, it is not only important, but also necessary to have
a generic distribution network configuration, which can cope
with various studies for residential microgrids.
Even though many microgrids have been developed to
work at a distribution level in the literature, few can be
directly used for residential applications. Literature on such
subject is very scarce. A distribution network is introduced in [10] to study an adaptive critic-based approach
for grid-connected microgrids. It consists of a single point
of common coupling (PCC) with multiple three-phase feeders from a local substation. The microgrid contains several
DG units and three-phase loads aggregated as the secondary
feeder loads. With the provision of local generation at a
customer end, the need to accommodate details of local distribution transformers and customer loads becomes an integral
part of the system model requirements. Even though the distribution network used in that study is capable of coordinating
DG units in a three-phase microgrid environment, it does not
have any capability to coordinate multiple single-phase units
in the form of residential microgrids.
In other studies, microgrids are connected directly to
the main grid without due consideration of transformer
interface at substations, nor reactance associated with
feeders [11]–[13]. For example, transitions of a three-phase
microgrid from an islanded to a grid-connected modes have
been investigated in [11] with focus on synchronization
procedures. The associated distribution system has been simplified with a direct connection to the grid at the PCC.
Furthermore, only aggregated constant resistive loads are
considered.
The microgrid considered in [12] consists of three power
electronics-interfaced DG units connected to an IEEE 5-bus
system. The IEEE x-bus standards (where x<13) are typically
used, where key features of a LV distribution networks are
omitted for simplicity in analysis. As a result, this model does
not contain sufficient detail to meet the needs in residential
microgrid studies, where one of the key points is coordination of multiple DG units using different power management
strategies at a customer level.
The microgrid explored in [13] is composed of a multi-bus
system with renewable energy sources connected to individual buses. The system architecture allows for aggregated
loads at the feeders and interconnection among the studied
microgrid, the utility network, and at individual buses serving
local loads without due consideration of transformers or interfacing devices. Furthermore, the renewable energy sources
are assumed to operate as centralized units on a bus, rather
than being distributed as in realistic residential microgrids.
Hence, this architecture does not represent a realistic distribution system in residential microgrids with generation sources
and storage devices located at different phases.
Residential microgrids have been investigated
in [14]–[16]. A laboratory-scaled single-phase radial microgrid is considered in [14] with generators and loads connected
to local nodes. The architecture is more suited for three-phase
microgrids with small micro-turbines as DG sources that
serve a residential community. No coordination among DG
sources has been considered. Furthermore, some of the losses
in key system components, such as distribution transformers,
have not been taken into account. This network architecture
would not provide an effective framework for residential
microgrid related studies.
A hybrid PV/battery system for a single household is
examined in [15]. A PV/battery system and local loads are
connected to a household distribution panel only. However,
the distribution system topology, primary feeder and transformers have not been considered, nor on potential coordination with DG units nearby, such as devices from next door
neighbors on the same local distribution network.
An energy management strategy has been considered for
a grid-connected residential microgrid in [16]. The system
consists of multiple DG sources connected to a three-phase
network at the PCC. The local and central energy management systems allow for coordination of local generation
and storage in residential units to achieve a state-of-charge
(SOC) equalization. This would avoid prolonged load shedding for some customers under an islanded condition in case
of insufficient supply. For this coordination strategy to work,
the customers need to be on the same phase as the primary
feeder. In a residential microgrid, different customers could
be fed from different phases on a same primary feeder. Consequently, such system architecture and associated control
strategies are not suitable for realistic situations in a practical
distribution system.
An islanded hybrid single- and three-phase microgrid has
been considered in [17]. This single-phase microgrid has DG
units with local loads on two of the phases while the third
phase is dedicated to loads only. Only single-phase loads have
been considered. Despite of this unique feature, this architecture cannot be adopted where single-phase sources and
loads are located in all three phases. Furthermore, the control
objectives are based on unidirectional power flow between
phases, they are not suited for power sharing studies in residential microgrids among different phases, where the power
flow among phases can be bi-directional. The actual direction
and the amount of power transfer depend on the availability
of surplus power and power mismatch among phases.
To investigate control and power management issues
for single- and three-phase microgrids with individual DG
sources, storage devices, and loads in different phases, it is
imperative to develop a benchmark model with versatile, yet
flexible, architectures. Since structure and parameters of distribution systems are country and region specific, the current
work will focus on those commonly found in North America.
The developed benchmark model is flexible enough to simulate a section of a distribution system by considering details
of feeder reactance, different transformer configurations and
wiring conventions of residential loads including roof-top
PV systems and battery storage devices in the laterals of a
primary feeder. This feeder can also supply power to common
three-phase loads; say, a school, or a local community center.
As compared to those in the literature, the current benchmark
model is more realistic to a practical distribution system environment. In an islanded operating mode, the benchmark has
the capability of exchanging power among phases through a
power management unit based on a back-to-back converter
configuration.
The paper is organized as follows; an overview of the
existing distribution network in North America is explained
in Section II. Section III identifies potential limitations of
existing distribution network models in light of proliferation
of residential size DG and battery storage devices. To address
these limitations, in Section IV, a benchmark distribution system architecture is developed. Using this benchmark, detailed
studies of a residential microgrid have been carried out in
Section V. Section VI presents the simulation results of three
case studies performed in PSCAD/EMTDC followed by the
conclusion.
II. DISTRIBUTION NETWORKS IN NORTH AMERICA
A simple radial distribution system from the local substation
to customers with residential loads is illustrated in Fig.1(a)
while the same network with DG units is shown in Fig.1(b).
In Fig.1(b), the PV and storage units are assumed to be
located at customers’ houses. These units can also be either
central to the phase, primary feeder or to the distribution
network. The back-to-back converters interconnect the three
phases for potential power transfer. The key features of a
distribution network are discussed in this section. For the sake
of simplicity, residential loads connected to bus#14 only are
shown here.

A. LOCAL SUBSTATION TO LOCAL DISTRIBUTION
TRANSFORMER
Even though the topology from bulk power sources to a
distribution network can vary from a simple radial system to more complex network configurations, the primary
feeders still serve a locality or a geographical area near the
local substation. As shown in Fig.1(a) the primary feeder
can branch out into several circuits or laterals. These laterals can be in a single-phase form and sub-laterals may be
tapped out subsequently, if necessary. These laterals can be
located in residential or rural areas, and normally consist of
a single-phase conductor and a neutral. Larger loads, such
as those of schools, community centers, local industrial sites
may be served by either dedicated underground or overhead
primary feeders. They are mainly in three-phase.

B. LOCAL DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMER TO
CUSTOMERS
Each phase in a primary feeder serves a group of residential
units. A split single-phase pole transformer is often used to
step down the voltage even further to meet the voltage level
for residential, commercial and industrial users as shown
in Fig.2. Such split phase transformers are available in both
120 V and 240 V with a common neutral to customers. The
local transformer steps down the feeder voltage from 13.8 kV
to 120 V/240 V [18].

C. AT CUSTOMER’S END
The voltages of the power source at a customer site can
be either 120 V or 240 V from outlets routed from a
local split phase transformer. These dual voltage outputs
are obtained conveniently between a phase and the ground
(120V), or between two phases (240 V). A single line diagram
showing such layouts is highlighted in Fig.2.

D. PV CONNECTION AT RESIDENTIAL UNITS
At residential sites, customers can set-up their own PV units
to off-set their household consumption or export to the grid.
A single line diagram of a typical PV connection at a res-
idential site is shown in Fig.2. After the converter stage,
the PV inverter output can be connected to the primary panel
board through an AC disconnect switch. As depicted in Fig.2,
the primary panel board is connected to a bidirectional utility
meter, which measures the net energy usage for accounting
purposes.

III. LIMITATIONS IN EXISTING DISTRIBUTION NETWORK
MODELS FOR RESIDENTIAL MICROGRID STUDIES
The existing models of the distribution network are not meant
for dealing with newly introduced DGs for microgrid studies.
Installation of high number of DG units, as shown in Fig.1(b),
requires enhancements to existing distribution network models. In essence, the following limitations have been identified
for the existing distribution network models:
1) Most of the microgrid studies in the literature (as
discussed in Section I) tend to focus on three-phase
systems. With proliferation of singe-phase PV systems,
battery storage units, and large short-term loads (e.g.
electric cars) at residential levels, there is a need for a
benchmark distribution network model, which can be
used to investigate the effects of these non-traditional
devices on the distribution networks. As reported
in [19], with high PV proliferation, the peak PV generation can become twice the capacity of the local
transformer. As a result, this can have a negative impact
in the overall balance of the grid system;
2) With installation of phase-wise generation and storage units, single-phase microgrids can be formed on
individual phases. The existing distribution network
models do not support such single-phase configuration scenarios for coordination control and energy
FIGURE 3. The developed intra-phase control scheme [20], [21].
management within each phase and between two different phases. This is mainly because of the imbalance
that is created, due to the difference in generation and
load demand. Previous works in unbalanced conditions
at the microgrid level have been focused on harmonic
current injection at the DC link to compensate the
non-linear loads [22]–[28]. These studies are limited to
centralized PV generation and storage in three-phase;
3) To the best of our knowledge, the problem addressed
herein poses a unique challenge to the current distribution systems, whereby there exist no distribution
system models in the literature that can accommodate realistic situations of phase-wise generation and
storage while simultaneously coordinating the multiple
singe-phase DG units installed in different phase(s) and
then connected on to a three-phase primary feeder;
4) The network model with its coordination control strategy should ensure that the voltage and frequency in
each phase are maintained by balancing generation and
consumptions under different conditions in that particular phase, while trying as much as possible towards
balancing the three phases. This feature is not supported in the existing distribution system models;
5) Community based power sharing using controllable power electronic devices is a novel idea for
single-phase microgrids, as studied in [20], [21]. Currently, there is no standard distribution system model
that can provide a unified framework to investigate
power and load sharing among different microgrids in
separate phases;
6) At present, the system utilized by distribution utilities
can give the operators real time visualization of current state of the network, fault zones or regions under
maintenance etc. The proposed system is a step towards
deployment of these residential microgrids whereby,
the system operators can simulate their jurisdiction’s
network off-line. This will later help them to later
deploy such microgrids in the future; and
7) By making use of the proposed benchmark distribution network with its various configuration parameters,
the ratings of back-to-back converters, the potential
system unbalance with multiple DG sources and the
control parameters can be determined.
IV. SINGLE-PHASE RESIDENTIAL MICROGRID STUDIES
The developed benchmark model overcomes the identified
deficiencies in the existing distribution system models as
in Section III. This new benchmark model is capable of
supporting ever-increasing number of DG units introduced at
individual consumer sites. Without loss of generality, three
regions of interest are highlighted in Fig.1:
1) At the left corner of Fig.1, a set of local PV generation
and storage units has been referred to as DG1. The
generation and storage that are located centrally with
respect to phase A, is referred to as DG2. It serves
the customers that are connected to this phase through
multiple distribution transformers. PV/storage at each
residence (DG1) can be used together with central
generation (DG2) to form Microgrid # 1. This configuration can be repeated in phase B and/or phase C.
2) Microgrid # 2 overlaps some region of Microgrid # 1
as is evident from Fig.1. Microgrid # 2, referred to as
DG3 in Fig.1, has its generation and storage installed
on the primary feeder at bus#14, which is central to its
three phases. If a fault occurs on bus#14, the loads on
this feeder can be served through this architecture.
3) Finally, DG4 serves the distribution system from the
substation onwards. The PV generation and storage
units are placed next to the first serving bus. It can
serve as a temporary source, should a fault occurs in the
substation or on the incoming transmission line. The
location of DG4 is strategic with respect to the entire
distribution network under the current consideration.
With DG4, Microgrid # 3 has been formed, which
incorporates both Microgrids # 1 and # 2 within its
jurisdiction.
Some of the salient features of this developed benchmark
distribution network model are discussed next.

A. COORDINATION OF DG UNITS IN GRID
CONNECTED MODE
The developed benchmark distribution system can be used
to study various scenarios in grid-connected residential
microgrids. These may involve the coordination of several
microgrid structures within a distribution network. Due to
the presence of phase-wise generation and storage units,
the benchmark allows for some of the local loads to be supported by the grid, while others by the local PV/battery hybrid
systems. This segregation of supplies for loads between the
utility and local DG sources is usually dependent upon a
specific configuration of connection and accounting arrangements of a customer [30].

B. COORDINATION OF DG UNITS IN AN ISLANDED
MODE
For islanded residential microgrids, coordination of DG units
is more complex as compared to that in grid-connected systems, because one can no longer use the grid as the reference
for voltage and frequency regulation. The situation becomes
even more complicated when single-phase DGs and loads
are considered. By referring to the structure for residential
microgrids in Fig.1, the following control and coordination
issues should be investigated:
1) In Microgrid #1, the DG1 at each customer’s home,
needs to be coordinated with DG2. Control strategies
can take this task on by either a master-slave or a
multi-master arrangement. If a master-slave approach
is chosen, DG2 can be designated as the ‘master unit’
to regulate the voltage and frequency in Microgrid #
1, while the DG1 will be run as a slave unit. These
units will be operated as power controlled sources.
In a multi-master configuration, two or more identified DG units can be used to regulate the frequency
and the voltage profile in Microgrid # 1. This can
be achieved if the units are arranged in droop controlled modes. Since it is necessary to maintain local
power management within a phase, such schemes are
referred to as intra-phase power management. Detailed
coverage of a modified vector control and improved
multi-segment droop control scheme adopted for the
intra-phase power management module can be founded
in [20], [21]. A block diagram representation is shown
in Fig.3. Five representative power management scenarios and their respective control objectives are tabulated in Table 1. These scenarios have been considered
in the case studies as described in Section VI to demonstrate the working principles and effectiveness of the
proposed intra-phase power management strategy.
2) The system originated from the primary feeder has been
designated as Microgrid # 2 as shown in Fig.1. Even
though this microgrid contains three phases, they are
made up by a single-phase microgrid with nested DG
units. The control strategy allows individual phases to
share power under an islanded condition according to
their load demands, capacities of DG units and the state
of charge of the battery storage units. In this way, it is
possible to achieve a balanced three-phase system even
through each phase can have very different local characteristics. This is achieved by the inter-phase power
management scheme, known as ‘Community Energy
Balance Control System’ as shown in Fig.4.
3) Since Microgrid # 2 is connected with Microgrid # 1,
DG 3 in Microgrid # 2 will have to be coordinated with
DG 1 and DG 2 in Microgrid # 1 as well. By a similar
token, Microgrid # 3 will also need to be coordinated
with Microgrids # 1 and # 2. Such nested configuration
makes control and power management challenging, but
at the same time, makes this model more versatile to
adapt to various realistic system configurations.

V. BENCHMARK DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM MODEL FOR
RESIDENTIAL MICROGRIDS
A section of radial distribution network of Fig.1 from the
local substation to customer residences, as shown in Fig.2,
is used as an example in the following analysis. The voltage
from the substation has been stepped down from 69 kV
to 13.8 kV in the current study. The parameters adopted
for the substation step down transformer are presented in
Table II [31].
The primary feeder adopted in this model corresponds
to an overhead three-phase transmission line, supported by
utility poles with the length varying between 1.61 and
24 km. According to ABB, the reactance (Rp and Xp shown
in Fig.1) of a 1000 kcm primary feeder cable, are given
in m/100ft [32]. For a 13.8 kV primary feeder, the parameters, including the values of the reactance used are tabulated
in Table III.

VI. CASE STUDIES
To validate performance of the benchmark distribution system, the architecture of Microgrid # 1, as shown in Fig.1,
is used for both grid-connected and islanded scenarios of residential microgrids. The configuration parameters of various
elements of the model are discussed first followed by the
simulation scenarios. It is assumed that one of the primary
feeders from the local substation is equipped with a hybrid
PV/battery unit and a droop controlled unit in each phase,
with interconnecting back-to-back converters to form a residential microgrid. A solution time step of 0.5µs is used in the
simulations using PSCAD/EMTDC.

A. CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS OF THE
BENCHMARK DISTRIBUTION NETWORK
The local distribution transformer used is a centrally tapped
transformer, which further steps the voltage down from
13.8 kV to 120/240 V. The parameters of a local distribution transformer used in the model are summarized
in Table IV [31]. In this study, 10 residential units have been
assigned to one phase from the primary feeder. It is assumed
that all the houses covered by the phase are situated at a
distance of 10 m from each other. This distance will add to
the resistance of electric cables, that are laid for each unit.
Typically 1/0 Aluminum-Copper Steel Reinforced (ACSR)
cable is used for underground service connections to residential units. In older communities, overhead connections
are still used. In these cases, the parameters may need to be
adjusted. The values for the cable resistance in each phase are
denoted by r1 and rN , where N represents the total number of
houses served on a phase as shown in Fig.1. The resistance
of 1/0 ACSR cable is 5.22 × 10−4/m [33]. Assume that
the maximum permissible voltage drop in the service cable
from the transformer to the Nth house is 2% [18], [31],
then, the maximum drop in voltage can be calculated as
VD = 120 × 2% = 2.4V. The power panel boards at
each house are commonly rated at 100 A [34]. Therefore,
the resistance of the service cable can be derived as 1rN =
2.4V/100A = 0.024. This is nearly equivalent to 45m
of additional service cable for the 10th house, as compared
with that of the house nearest to the distribution transformer. Additional cable may even be required for overhead
clearance [34].
The local distribution transformer and residential units on
phase A of the primary feeder can be repeated for the other
two phases, given that the loading in each phase is similar.
Otherwise, transformers with different MVA ratings need to
be used as per regulations.
As shown in Fig.1, the three-phase primary feeder is routed
to serve local residential units. For a typical #4 AWG cable,
the reactance represented by RA and XA in Fig.1 is taken as
27.4 + j10.45m/100ft [33]. The advantage of using these
parameters in the model can become clear when single-phase
laterals are loaded with multiple groups of residential units,
which are separated by some distance. The reactance will
cause voltage drops along the lateral. The amount of such
voltage drops will depend on actual loading of the residence,
quality of the cable used and the number of homes served by
the primary feeder.

The residential units in Fig.1 have the same electrical
layout as shown in Fig.2. Each unit is assumed to have some
typical household electrical apparatus namely, microwave
oven, television set, washing machine, refrigerator, compact
fluorescent lamps (CFLs), high and low speed fans. These
loads are connected to electrical outlets where voltage can be
both 120 and 240V. #AWG-14 cables are used for electrification of each unit, which has a rating of 15 A [35].

B. TRANSITION FROM GRID-CONNECTED MODE TO
ISLANDED MODE
A residential unit may have access both grid power and local
generation. Some loads are served by the utility power, others
by DG units. The utility power can be used for heavier loads
such as washing machines, driers, and refrigerators. Lighter
loads for example CFLs, fans, computers might be dedicated
to the PV/battery hybrid system unit. To investigate system
behaviors during a transition from a grid-connected mode to
an islanded mode, bus#14 is simulated with a three-phase to
ground fault, which is non-recoverable in a typical 5 cycles
time period. The DG units in the residential microgrid (hybrid
PV/battery system) will serve the loads under this scenario.
The simulation results are presented in Figures 5 and 6.
Prior to t1 = 10s, the grid is operating normally with the
primary feeder operating at f = 60Hz and Vrms = 13.8kV,
as evident from the Fig.5(a). A zoomed-in version of the same
figure is also shown, for visualization purposes. Fig.5(c),
shows the DC power profile of the system. For the duration
of the simulation run i.e. 75s, it is assumed that the PV
power generation is constant at 1000W. This is represented
by PpvφA
. The respective charging and discharging of the
battery in the hybrid unit is represented by PbattφA
and by the
state-of-charge (SOC) in Fig.6(a). Since some of the loads in
the residential microgrid will be supported by the grid and
others by the PV/battery hybrid unit, the AC power profile
in Fig.5(c) illustrates the contributions by the grid and the
hybrid unit respectively.
At t1 = 10s, an extended three-phase to ground fault is
detected. At this point, the grid becomes unavailable. Hence,
the total load is taken up by the hybrid unit, as shown
in Fig.5(c). After t1 = 10s, the load transitions are simulated
by step changes of 144W. At this stage, any additional PV
power available will be used to charge the battery. This is
illustrated between t1 = 10s and t2 = 20s in Fig.5(b).
Between t2 = 20s and t3 = 65s, both the PV and battery units
contribute towards the loads. This is shown by the battery
discharging in Fig.5(b) with the respective change in SOC
in Fig.6(a). After t3 = 65s till the end of the simulation run,
the battery starts charging again. This is because the loading
deceases below the PV power. At this time, only the PV unit
will serve the loads while the battery is being charged. Since
the loading trajectories are such that the hybrid unit alone is
capable of handling the loads, the droop unit is not required,
as shown in Fig.5(c). The intra-phase power management
scheme introduced in [20], [21] allows the system to operate
between fmax = 60.25Hz and fmin = 59.95Hz, as evident
from Fig.6(b). Similar results can be obtained for other phases
also.
From these simulation studies, it can be concluded that the
benchmark distribution system is capable of operating both in
grid-connected and islanded conditions. The system is also
capable of coordinating a hybrid PV/battery unit with the
local loads.

C. INTRA-PHASE POWER MANAGEMENT
The simulation results for intra-phase power management
strategy are shown in Fig.7. The load increases in steps of
288W. The simulation is run for 130s, with step changes in
loads after every 10s. In this simulation run, it is assumed that
φA is already operating in islanded condition. The battery has
an initial SOC of 71.2%. As a result of the relatively low load
demand at early part of the simulation, the battery charges
with the excess PV power generation in φB. The SOC control
as shown in Fig.3, manages the battery to be charged till the
maximum threshold of SOCmax . The charging state is evident
from the negative battery power between t1 = 0s and t2 = 5s.
As per the operational scenario #1 in Table 1, the system
frequency is the above nominal frequency, f0, under islanded
condition.
Further increase in the load demand between t2 = 5s
and t3 = 10s, causes the battery to be in the floating
state as PpvφB
= PloadφB
i.e. PbattφB
= 0W. In this case,
the total PV power is used to support the load. This validates
scenario #2 in Table 1.
Between t3 = 10s and t4 = 25s, the load increases further.
In this case, the hybrid PV and battery units start supporting the load, as is represented by positive battery power,
PbattφB
, in Fig.7. As per the improved multi-segment droop
strategy, the system operates below the nominal frequency,
f0, [20], [21]. This validates scenario #3 in Table 1.
At t4 = 25s, the battery unit is supplying its rated power
of P
max
batt , with the system operating at f
min
batt . The SOC control
block in Fig.3, will regulate the battery power at 1000W,
which is the capacity of the battery. Therefore, any increase
in load demand will cause a power imbalance. For intra-phase
power management strategy in the proposed benchmark distribution system, this power imbalance will be catered by the
additional droop unit in the phase, represented by PdroopφB
in Fig.7. This validates scenario #4 in Table 1.
From t5 = 35s and t9 = 70s, the load demand starts
to decrease. Firstly, the contribution from the droop unit
decreases to 0W and and then, the PV and battery units start
supporting the load once again. As the load demand decreases
below PpvφB
at t8 = 60s, the battery charging resumes. This
is reflected in the increase of battery’s SOC in Fig.7.
Based on the results of these simulations, it can be concluded that the proposed intra-phase power management in
the benchmark model is capable of coordinating multiple DG
units effectively. This feature is crucial when dealing with
single-phase DG and storage units in a distribution network.

D. INTER-PHASE POWER MANAGEMENT
The inter-phase power transfer can be observed at t5 =
32s in Fig.8. At this point, the PV, battery and droop units
are already at their rated power output. Further increase in
the load demand will cause power deficiency in φB. Thus,
in order to maintain power balance in this phase, the proposed intra-phase power management strategy alone is no
longer sufficient. In this case, inter-phase power management
strategy is required to transfer the additional power from
power-surplus phase to the power-deficient phase to maintain
the system frequency at fmin. The inter-phase power transfer is
initiated by the Local Energy Balance Control System and the
respective logic, as shown in Fig.4, to activate the necessary
back-to-back converter of φA. The signal EB2BA,B,C
, as shown
previously in Fig.4, are used for this purpose. The power reference for the back-to-back converter is communicated from
the Local Energy Balance Control System to the Community
Energy Balance Control System. For the simulated case as
shown in Fig.8, φA supplies φB with the required net power.
Similar results can be obtained for other phases also. Further
details on this control strategy can be found in [20], [21].
The simulation results have demonstrated that, by inclusion of an inter-phase power management unit, the developed
benchmark distribution system model is capable of dealing
with and mitigating system imbalance due to single-phase
DG, storage units, and load.

VII. CONCLUSION
A new benchmark distribution system model capable of supporting studies of residential microgrids has been developed.
This model supports both grid-connected and islanded systems, as well as transitions from one to the other. A unique
feature of this model is that it allows for integration of
multiple single-phase DG sources to be located in a particular phase, yet, it also supports coordination of these units
within their respective phases or across different phases.
This is accomplished by an intra-phase power management
and an inter-phase power management units. This proposed
benchmark model will allow utility personnel to investigate
the impact of ever increasing installation of roof-top PV
units and residential energy storage units. Introduction of
the intra-phase and the inter-phase power management units
improves controllability of the distribution system significantly for load balancing within a single phase or among three
phases, when the DG and storage units are operating indiscriminately. Three case studies have been carried out using
this newly developed benchmark to illustrate its effectiveness.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the local utility, London
Hydro, for providing useful information on the practical distribution systems upon which this study is based.






