Abstract

High renewable and variable electricity penetration in power systems requires increased grid stabili-
zation from balancing power plants, namely gas operated. In the future, however, stabilization might be
provided by electric vehicles operating under the smart-grid framework. Departing from this, this paper
discusses and quantifies to what extent electric vehicles are required to be possible to shut down gas
power plants. The analysis is performed using the EnergyPLAN tool, for the case study of the Portuguese
power system in 2050. The results suggest that even a small share of the fleet of electric vehicles
providing load balancing could lead to important reductions in gas use and energy excess. The gas share
in the electricity mix is reduced from 10.2% without electric vehicles providing for stabilization to zero
with 30% of the fleet providing it; the energy excess is reduced from 1.5% to zero above 15% of electric
vehicles stabilizing the grid. Therefore, to achieve a power system without fossil fuels, electric vehicles
capable of supporting the grid should be developed and adopted, as should be promoted the market and
regulatory conditions to allow this.

1. Introduction
A mostly carbon free power supply is envisaged for Europe by
2050. To accomplish it, renewable energy generation is being
deployed at a fast pace: of the 24.5 GW of new gross power gen-
eration capacity installed in the European Union in 2016, almost
80% were wind (51%) and solar (27%) [1]. Until now, their share in
the electricity mix is not very high e on average, 13% in the Euro-
pean Union [2] e, and so they do not yet imply great consequences
in the way power systems are operated. However, with further
deployment of these technologies, challenges arise [3].
Wind and solar are variable renewable energy sources (VRES),
i.e., their output cannot be determined by the system operator, and
there are limits to their forecast [4]; yet, electricity supply and
demand must be permanently balanced, which is nowadays largely
achieved by equalizing the generation to the demand through the
adjustment of controllable generators (i.e., increasing or decreasing
their output) acting as power reserve. Therefore, when the sun
stops shinning or winds blow stronger, controllable generation
must accommodate the sometimes abrupt fluctuations, especially if
the operator wants to avoid curtailment, i.e., the use of less wind or
solar power than is potentially available at a given time [5].

The rising share of VRES in power systems means that the net-
load, i.e., the electricity demand minus the VRES generation, is
gradually more volatile (both in frequency and amplitude),
requiring increased grid stabilization. Base load power plants, e.g.
coal and nuclear, will have to be run down to very low load regi-
mens, to avoid major overcapacity when wind and sun power
peaks; at the same time, power reserve should be available online
to cope with the higher load following needs [6]. With increasing
VRES share, the role of thermal power plants to balance the vari-
ability is increased, which means that in this scenario natural gas
power plants will continue to be important to stabilize the grid,
even if they gradually operate less hours in the year. Consequently,
they inject less energy into the grid, becoming less profitable, and
so expensive to maintain.
Besides conventional power reserve, a set of non-traditional
options to provide grid stabilization, allowing greater VRES pene-
tration, are available or projected for the future, such as demand
side management (DSM), VRES control, resource diversity, sta-
tionary energy storage, or the smart grid. They all require signifi-
cant changes in the way power systems operate [7].
One of those alternatives to provide stabilization is by means of
battery electric vehicles, abbreviated as EVs in this paper, and the
controllable energy storage that they represent. Electric mobility is
taking off, expected to reach significant market share in the coming
decades [8] e by 2050, EVs might represent around 70% of the total
road transport [9]. The large combined battery capacity of EVs will
allow them to assist on the integration of VRES into existing power
grids [10]: since vehicles are parked most of the time, they are
expected to be a new player by storing VRES energy, such as in
times of generation surplus [6], or by stabilizing the grid, through
the provision of ancillary services [11].
This article departs from this context to explore from the
perspective of energy and power balances the extent to which EVs
may substitute thermal power plants in stabilizing the grid. For
that, a scenario of the Portuguese power system in 2050 with
several levels of EVs providing for stabilization was modelled and
simulated. The feasibility of the scenario is assessed from the
standpoint of the model operation, and the implications are ana-
lysed. Presently, the reliability of the Portuguese system is mostly
assured by combined cycle gas (CCGTs1) and large hydro power
plants [12], and thus it represents a good testbed for what is pro-
posed. The intention and contribution of this work is to quantify
how electric vehicles can displace gas power generation for load
balancing national-scale power systems with high penetration of
renewables.
The article proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents the frame-
work of grid stabilization by electric vehicles, followed by a litera-
ture review; Section 3 presents the methodology adopted for this
study; in Section 4 the results are presented and discussed; and
Section 5 finalizes with the conclusions.

2. Background

2.1. Framework of load balancing by electric vehicles
Changes in power plants output are called ramps. The tradi-
tional generators possessing the required quick ramping capabil-
ities to balance large systems are large hydro and gas units.2 To
exemplify, Fig. 1 shows the aggregated wind and natural gas power
generation output for the whole Portuguese power system over a
period of one week, where the complementarity between the
output of wind and natural gas is evident. Examples of ramping are
signalled.
The aggregated load and generation are balanced in real time by
a set of ancillary services that differ according to the time frame of
application, such as load following (inter and intra-hour) and
regulation (minute timescale), by which generation is matched to
load in real-time by increasing or decreasing the former [14]; these
services are continuously required to stabilize the grid [15]. The
increase of VRES leads to the need of thermal generation for the
role of balancing the variability in net load. However, the capacity
factor of these thermal power plants is reduced, because they are
less needed for bulk power, and so VRES impact directly on their
profitability [16].
There are prospects about using EV batteries to provide grid
ancillary services, reducing or replacing the need of thermal gen-
eration. This is possible since their response time is very short and
the development and deployment of the smart grid, with a proper
communication structure, will allow their control and dispatch
[17]. The concept of using EVs as a grid resource, acting as load and
storage/generation, is called vehicle-to-grid (V2G) [18]. From the
grid standpoint, an individual EV has a negligible storage capacity,
and it is an unpredictable power resource given that it might be
unplugged from the grid and driven at any time [17]; thus, they
have to be grouped together and managed by aggregators. Under
this approach, EVs might become active players in the reliability of
the power grid [19], and in its economics [20]. This is today an
active topic of research (see Section 2.2).
The V2G system operates in two possible modes: (1) unidirec-
tional, in which the power flow direction is just from the grid to the
vehicle; (2) bidirectional, where the flow is both ways, i.e., the
batteries are able to discharge to the grid. Both modes allow the
provision of ancillary services, by request of the transmission sys-
tem operator (TSO). In unidirectional mode, the EV load may be
regulated up or down. It emulates spinning reserve, i.e., additional
generation of fast response, by decreasing the EVs charging rate.
The time difference between the time the vehicles are plugged and
the charging duration provides flexibility that can be exploited for
these purposes [21]. In bidirectional mode, spinning reserve can be
additionally provided by injecting power from the batteries into the
grid, actively contributing for peak load shaving [19]. Fig. 2 repre-
sents the dispatch of ancillary services in both modes. For addi-
tional insights on uni- and bidirectional V2G operation, see
Ref. [14].
Unidirectional V2G has less ability to provide ancillary services
than bidirectional V2G, but its realization is much cheaper and
simpler, given that it could be done by adding a simple controller to
the EV chargers to manage their charge rate [22]. In contrast,
bidirectional V2G encounters many challenges, such as a battery
degradation effect induced by the frequently required charging and
discharging cycles [19]; this is a critical barrier to overcome [23].
Additionally, bidirectional EV chargers are still in their early stages,
mostly prototype-based [17].
It is likely that ancillary services provided by EVs will be
rewarded based on the amount of time the services are provided,
even if no energy is supplied to the power grid, or the balance is
zero [24]. The implementation of both cases requires a carefully
designed energy trading policy between the utilities and the
vehicle owners, in particular one that encourages the latter to be
involved [25], and the development of proper regulations [14],
otherwise the business model for V2G may not be viable [26].
Smart charging of EVs assist the integration of RES into power
systems, but their mass deployment introduces different technical
challenges related to power quality and service reliability, such as
line and transformer overloading, voltage deviations or harmonic
distortion. These are important issues to address; it has been pro-
posed however that advanced smart metering, communication
interfaces and coordinated delayed charging will alleviate them
[27].

2.2. Prior recent work on grid integration of electric vehicles
The integration of a large fleet of EVs in a RES based power
system under a smart-grid environment has been addressed in
Ref. [28], with emphasis on the coordination between the TSO and
the charging of the vehicles. The authors found that this coordi-
nation reduces the total operation costs of the system, allowing the
reduction of both energy curtailment and volatility of the real-time
prices. Also for a RES based power system, in Ref. [29] the authors
compared stationary energy storage with V2G in terms of their
impact on the combined electricity and light-duty transportation
system. They found V2G energy storage less capable of balancing
the power system due to the constraints of travel patterns and
availability of charging stations at both home and workplaces.
Nonetheless, V2G energy storage can provide benefits, such as a
more efficient use of available renewable energy compared to sta-
tionary energy storage systems. Additionally, grid-controlling the
charging of EVs can reduce the required capacity of stationary
energy storage to obtain the same benefit for RES penetration and
GHG emissions reductions. Ref. [30] focuses on the role of EVs to
provide demand response, exploring a stochastic model for risk
management and participation planning of EVs by the TSO. The
risks include uncertainties in RES output, electric load, driving
patterns and transmission lines’ reliability. The results show that
using services such as time-based demand response is efficient in
reducing the electricity costs for the players. It is also shown that
EVs participation in incentive-based demand response is strongly
conditioned by their availability for charging.
In what regards planning for supporting a growing penetration
of EVs into power systems, Ref. [31] uses a numerical model to
study the role of load balancing power systems by EVs, and their
impact on the systems steady-state stability, which is useful to
determine the limits of power transmission. The model may be
applied to establish criteria for EVs charging stations siting and
sizing, and to determine the steady-state stability of a small-scale
systems. In Ref. [32] it is proposed an expansion planning method
for enabling distribution systems to support growing penetrations
of EVs. In Ref. [33] the author assessed the use of EVs with V2G
capability combined with RES for improving the characteristics of
power distribution systems. He found that the lowest electricity
generation cost and the best voltage profile are obtained by
simultaneously using conventional power generators, RES as
distributed generators and EVs. As for the impact of EVs on the
reliability of power systems, Ref. [34] discusses the importance of
choosing a proper charging strategy of EVs, especially for the case of
large fleets. They found that the resulting loading increase of EVs
charging may weaken the system reliability, unless a proper
strategy is applied; in this case, it is proposed that system reserve
support could also be provided by EVs.
On the economics of V2G, Ref. [35] estimates the grid payments
necessary to compensate the additional costs of providing ancillary
services by EVs, namely from battery fading. The scenario studied is
the UK until 2030. It is found that the expected revenues are much
less than the compensation required, and it may not be until 2030
that sufficient vehicles are on the market to provide a cost-effective
service e at least under current market and regulatory conditions.
Ref. [36] studies scenarios where net-income can be generated by
selling electricity from EVs either to buildings or to the grid. The
case study is also in the UK. It is found that the EVs acquisition price,
and battery degradation and infrastructure costs are key factors.
The greatest return on investment is found to be when EVs have
additional income from participating in the capacity market.
This survey shows what was previously recognized, that electric
vehicles are expected to have a role in power systems for energy
storage and load balancing, and V2G technology should enable
higher renewable energy penetration and reduced GHG emissions.
Nevertheless, it is important to evaluate if, by themselves, EVs have
the ability to accommodate all the variability of generation and
demand in large scale power systems, or thermal generation will
always be required for system balancing. This has no clear response,
and this paper contributes to answer this.

3. Approach
The general methodology of this work is thoroughly explained
in Refs. [6] and [37]. Bellow it is summarized the common approach
of these studies, and detail is given to the differences and relevant
aspects for the present discussion.
The Portuguese electricity system is used as case study; it is
particularly suitable for this purpose because this country has sig-
nificant wind and solar potentials e the former is on the way to be
tapped onshore, with 4.8 GW of installed capacity, corresponding to
23% of share in the electricity mix in 2015, and the latter is almost
untapped, with 0.43 GW of capacity and a share of 2% [13]. It is
noteworthy that Portugal has one of the highest insolation levels
among Europe [38].
The impact of V2G on power systems can be quantified using
aspects such as vehicle penetration, charging schedule, charging
characteristics and driving patterns [17]. Based on this, one devel-
oped a model for the electricity-EV mobility system in EnergyPLAN,
a validated computer tool to analyse energy systems on an hourly
basis, optimizing their operation [39]. The model was calibrated to
a reference period (2015) to ensure its reliability, and then it was
used to simulate future scenarios, as explained below.
A technical optimization of the system was chosen as opposed to
a market optimization, in order to capture how the system per-
forms internally from the perspective of energy and power balances
with V2G providing for stabilization; this would be compromised
by a market driven simulation. Therefore, the model assumes that
imports take place when the supply is lower than the demand, and
that exports take place when there is energy excess. For the same
reason, the model was set to consider that the import/export ca-
pacity is not able to provide for stabilization.

3.1. Scenarios
A scenario for the year 2050 was designed and tested for
different levels of V2G stabilization. It incorporates long term
projections for the sectors of electricity and electric mobility from
reference entities, such as the European Union [40] and the Inter-
national Energy Agency [8]. The relevant details of the scenario are
provided below.

3.1.1. Power plants fleet
The considered total installed capacity in 2050 is 41.4 GW, which
approximately corresponds to 2.3 times the present level. It as-
sumes a solar capacity of 16.7 GW and a wind capacity of 9.1 GW
(on- and off-shore). It also assumes 5.7 GW of gas power plants and
4 GW of pumped hydro storage. These capacities are built upon
long-term European Union objectives for the climate-energy area
and upon different reference scenarios presented in the literature,
e.g. by the International Energy Agency, as Refs. [6] and [37] detail.
Table 1 details all the relevant parameters used in the model.

3.1.2. Import-export capacity
The import-export capacity is assumed to be 3200 MW, in line
with the objective for 2020 [41].

3.1.3. Grid stabilization level
To maintain constant balance between generation and load, a
minimum share of load following capable power plants is needed.
This is important to quantify in order to assure that the reference
model accurately represents the reality, and to know in the sce-
narios what part of the load diagram may be replaced by EVs
providing for stabilization e see Section 3.1.6. Equation (1) can be
used to find that level. At a given time, the share of dispatchable
generation (dstab) is given as function of estab, the power output
from regulation capable sources, and etotal, the total power that the
system is producing at that time. The index i corresponds to the
hourly values of the time horizon chosen for the analysis.

The share of generation capable to stabilize the grid in 2015 was
found to be 60.9% on average, with a minimum of 17.1%. However,
although 2015 was the reference year for the calibration, this value
was not considered in the scenarios, since in May 2016 a new
minimum of 15.9% was identified; the latter was assumed for the
2050 model. It happened in the middle of a four days straight
period, during which the renewable generation always exceeded
the demand (from 6:45am on Saturday, 7 May, until 5:45pm the
following Wednesday). The regulation capable generation power
output for that period is represented in Fig. 3.

3.1.4. Thermal generation flexibility
The operational range of thermal plants determines their ‘flex-
ibility factor’, given by the fraction of annual peak load below which
they are able to operate [42], as in Eq. (2), where eth represents the
electricity generation from the thermal power plants fleet.

The technical flexibility can be difficult to assess, as the mini-
mum operating capability is determined by thermal units cycling
costs [43]. In 2015 the natural gas power plants were shut down for
several periods of the year, sometimes just briefly (<3 h); overall,
they were totally stopped for about 8% of the time, even though
2015 was a dry year, with an hydrological index of 0.74 (it translates
water availability e a value of 1 corresponds to the average year)
[44]. This suggests that these plants are operated very flexibly; for
the future, the flexibility of thermal power plants is expected to
increase [45], and so the model assumes for them 100% flexibility in
2050.
Table 1 summarises the input data assumed for the generation
system in 2050.

3.1.5. Electric vehicles
The 2050 mobility scenario comprises an EV share of 61.4% of
the total stock of passenger vehicles, corresponding to 2.56 million
EVs, distributed as pure battery electric vehicles (PEVs) and plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), as Ref. [6] details. The energy
density of the batteries was considered to double from present
level, thus extending the driving range twofold. It amounts to a
total of 89.5 GWh of potentially available battery storage. The
average travel demand was considered to be 35 km/day, the same
as in the present [46].
Electric vehicles are assumed to be charged according to an
optimized smart charging algorithm that minimizes excess of en-
ergy production, scheduling EV charging to absorb it, and maxi-
mizes V2G stabilization, using it to replace fossil based generation
that is balancing the grid [47] (see next Section for details). If there
is no energy in excess, the model evaluates the driving re-
quirements for the next hours and forces the charging as needed, so
that it does not interfere with the EVs driving requirements; it calls
whatever dispatchable sources that are available to fully charge the
batteries prior to driving, with priority to the less carbon intensive
sources. As a last resource, fossil fuel power plants are ramped up or
switched on. Conservatively, a unidirectional V2G operation was
adopted, meaning that the model considers that V2G does not
inject power into the grid (c.f. Section 2.1). It is considered that both
PEVs and PHEVs are able to operate in V2G mode.
It is assumed that 70% of the parked cars are connected to the
grid, using 7.2 kW connections, which corresponds to residential
circuits of 30 A [48]. From those connected, a varying amount of
them, between 0 and 100%, are assumed to provide stabilization,
which constitutes the ‘EV stabilization share’, defined in Eq. (3). The
V2G capacity depends on the quantity of vehicles connected to the
grid, which depends on the vehicles travel patterns, and on the
stabilization share, as Ref. [37] details.

3.1.6. Displacement of thermal generation by electric vehicles for
stabilization
In the model developed for the scenario, the production of the
thermal power plants fleet at i hour is determined by Eq. (5), where
cth is the installed capacity of the thermal power plant fleet
(7071 MW); dtotal is the total power demand; etotal is the total power
generation other than thermal; dstab is the grid stabilization level
(Eq. (1)); ehydro is the large hydro power generation; CV2G is the V2G
availability (Eq. (4)); and EV stab is the EV stabilization share 

That is, except for the case in which the installed capacity serves
as a constraint, in which energy import takes place, thermal gen-
eration is given by the largest of (1) the difference between demand
and the remainder of energy generation and (2) the minimum
thermal power generation needed to stabilize the grid, which de-
creases as EV stab increases. It should be noted that the model is
designed to simulate aggregately thermal power production, i.e.,
gas and biomass, but fuel is distributed differently according to the
resource available, with priority given to biomass over gas. For
additional details on the V2G modelling and the analytics part, see
Ref. [37].

3.1.7. Ramps
It is assumed that dispatchable units are able to ramp at 100% of
rated power per hour, both upward and downward. This assump-
tion is based on the fact that biomass power plants, the slowest to
react from those that are considered to exist in 2050 e gas turbines
and reservoir hydro power plants are quicker e, are able to ramp at
5e10% of rated power per minute [3]. It is also assumed that the
provision of ancillary services by EVs are not restricted by ramps
constraints, since batteries are very fast to react (100%/min) [16].
3.2. Limitations
The EnergyPLAN tool models hourly balanced energy scenarios
and it is not designed to compute short dynamics of power systems.
Parameters such as frequency and voltage fluctuations must be
accounted separately by short-term dynamic simulations, which do
not optimize energy and power balances like EnergyPLAN does.
Therefore, the two types of simulations should be complemented
by each other to ensure the feasibility of energy scenarios [51].
Likewise, since EnergyPLAN models spatially aggregate energy
scenarios, local or regional effects such as on the distributions grids,
or transmission constraints, are not captured; consequently,
regional grid analysis should serve as complement [52].

4. Results and discussion
To evaluate the results, a set of relevant parameters is analysed:
natural gas share in the electricity mix, surplus of electricity, which
corresponds to energy that needs to be curtailed after the export
capacity is exhausted, and gas power plants ramps.
For systems with high VRES existing capacity, net load can be
very different than normal load, showing higher volatility and
different ramping patterns [16]. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 5,
showing the net load duration curves for the system in 2015
(12 GW of RES capacity installed) and for the 2050 simulation
(35.6 GW of RES). These curves represent the amount of time of the
year that net load is above a given level. Two types of net load are
shown for 2050: one excluding the EV smart charging load, called
‘simple net load’, and the other including it, called ‘compound net
load’.
The figure confirms the increased variability in 2050, as shown
by the much wider range of simple net load. The compound net
load does not show such a wide range since the charging of the
vehicles is mostly allocated to periods where the net load is
negative. Note that in 2015 the system net load was always above
zero, and that in 2050 it is above zero only about 6500 h, and so it is
to expect that the capacity factor of balancing generation, namely
gas power plants, will be reduced. It is also significant that without
EV smart charging, as the simple net load curve shows, the system
would operate in oversupply (negative net load) around 40% of the
time. When EV charging is included, the frequency of oversupply
episodes is strongly reduced, as shown by the compound net load
curve. Also note that the peak power demand in 2050 is consid-
erably reduced, both in amplitude and duration.
Fig. 6 shows the natural gas share and electricity in surplus,
relative to energy generation, as function of the EV stabilization
share. It can be seen that even small levels of EV stabilization lead to
important reductions in natural gas use and energy excess. More-
over, the marginal benefits of incrementing EV stabilization are
higher when its value is low, with pronounced diminishing returns
from about 20% of EV stabilization, i.e., an EV stabilization greater
than 20% does not lead to significant gains. Without EV stabiliza-
tion, the natural gas share is 10.3% and the energy surplus is 1.5%;
from 15% of EV stabilization onwards, the surplus is reduced to zero.
This is because, as explained above, the EV stabilization, unlike gas
stabilization, is achieved by balancing instantaneous loads without
the need of any power injection. Regarding CO2 emissions, 30% of
EV stabilization allows the reduction of 2.41 Mt, if one compares to
0% of EV stabilization. This amounts to 15% of current CO2 emissions
from the electricity sector [13]. These results suggest that even if
V2G availability is smaller than what was considered, e.g. due to
increased driving of vehicles or a lesser amount of them, it will
probably continue to be enough to achieve the same.
Fig. 7 shows the load duration curves of the thermal power
plants ramps for 0 and 100% EV stabilization. It represents the
amount of time of the year the facilities are operating above a given
level of ramps. Comparing the model results with 2015, also shown
in the figure, it can be seen that ramp rates will increase substan-
tially. While 2015 ramps were comprised between 1000
and þ 1000 MW/h, the model suggests that in 2050 this range
could be extended to 3000 to þ3000 MW/h, as the result of
increased VRES penetration. That is, even though the share of
thermal plants decrease (from about 50% in 2015 to 19e30% in
2050, depending on EV stabilization), they must operate in a rather
more flexible way. Table 3 summarises this data.
If one compares the differences between the results for 0 and
100% EV stabilization, one sees that, without EV stabilization,
thermal power plants must be operating virtually all the time,
whereas for 100% EV stabilization they operate much less (depicted
by zero values at the middle of the curve) e just 55% of the time.
When EVs provide for stabilization, the average operating level of
thermal power plants is strongly reduced and ramps at the ex-
tremes are more pronounced. Without EV stabilization, the average
ramp-down is 327 MW/min and ramp-up is 402 MW/min, whereas
with 100% EV stabilization ramps are respectively 441 MW/min and
677 MW/min, hence about 45% stronger. Table 4 summarises this
data.
Even though the results of Fig. 6 suggest that natural gas could
be withdrawn from the electricity mix above 30% of EVs stabiliza-
tion, the gas capacity ought to be replaced by flexible enough
biomass or biogas capacity, in order to cope with the increased
flexibility required for thermal power plants, as Fig. 7 notes. Even
so, the primary resource to operate these power units does not
need to increase since they will run with a low capacity factor, as it
happens today with natural gas (23.8% in the Portuguese system in
2015), which strengths the need to develop for these operators an
effective capacity remuneration system, adapted to RES growth
[53].
Finally, Fig. 8 shows annual heat maps for the thermal ramping
with different levels of EV stabilization (none, on top, and 100%, on
bottom). They allow to draw three main conclusions: (1) between
both scenarios ramps are similar during periods where the sun is
below the horizon; (2) the more extreme ramping is at sunrise and
sunset, because of the high solar capacity installed, that needs to be
balanced during those periods; and, (3) in the 100% EV stabilization
scenario, thermal power plants are mostly idle in the middle of the
day.

5. Conclusions

Balancing power supply and demand will shift from the gen-
eration to the demand side. Today, in spite of increasing levels of
RES generation, balance is mostly achieved at the generation level,
by adjusting controllable supply to power, namely from gas power
plants, which have an important role stabilizing the grid. In the
future, one alternative way to provide stabilization is by means of
electric vehicles (EVs), since they represent controllable load
capable of supplying ancillary services. This article explored the
extent to which EVs might offer an alternative to gas to stabilize the
grid. A model of the Portuguese power system in 2050 was used as
case study. The results qualitatively are expected to be extendible to
other systems alike, i.e., systems having a large share of renewable
energy mostly balanced by large hydro and gas.
The model results suggest that even small levels of EV stabili-
zation lead to important reductions in gas use and energy excess.
The gas share in the electricity mix is reduced from 10.2% without
EV providing for stabilization to zero with 30% of EVs providing it;
the energy excess is reduced from 1.5% to zero above 15% of EV
stabilization. Larger EV stabilization does not lead to significant
gains. It seems therefore that EV stabilization can eliminate the
need for gas power plants.
The results also show that by 2050 the maximum ramp rates are
expected to increase markedly compared to today, by three fold,
consequence of the high deployment of variable energy sources.
That is, while the gas share might decrease, the remaining thermal
power plants, such as biomass and biogas, will be required to
operate in a rather more flexible way, and substitute gas capacity
for flexibility provision. The 2050 model shows that, without EV
stabilization, thermal power plants would be operating virtually all
the time, whereas with it they operate much less. An effective
remuneration system based on capacity is thus needed for these
operators.
Finally, it ought to be stressed that there is no experience of
using fleets of EVs to provide grid flexibility at a large scale. If this
becomes a reality, significant changes in the way power systems are
operated will be needed. Predictably, there will be key challenges to
address, such as the monitoring and analysis of large integrated
data generated by the EVs to support the system operation, and
issues related to system adequacy. Nonetheless, the authors believe
that studies like this are useful to gain a conceptual understanding
on how the factors affect each other, outlining possible develop-
ment paths to the decision-makers, giving them insight about the
effects of their policies.
