Abortion laws and women’s health
Damian Clarkea,∗, Hanna Mühlradb
a Department of Economics, Universidad de Chile and IZA, Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile b IFAU – Institute for Evaluation of Labour Market and Education Policy & Department of Clinical Sciences, Danderyd Hospital (KI DS) |
Karolinska Institutet, Sweden
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 13 May 2020
Received in revised form
22 November 2020
Accepted 23 November 2020
Available online 13 December 2020
JEL classification:
I18
J13
K38
H75
Keywords:
Abortion
Maternal morbidity
Maternal mortality
Health care provision
Political economy
Legislative reform

a b s t r a c t
We examine the impact of progressive and regressive abortion legislation on women’s
health in Mexico. Following a 2007 reform in the Federal District of Mexico which
decriminalised and subsidised early-term elective abortion, multiple other Mexican states
increased sanctions on illegal abortion. We observe that the original legalisation resulted in
a sharp decline in maternal morbidity, particularly morbidity due to haemorrhage early in
pregnancy. We observe small or null impacts on women’s health from increasing sanctions
on illegal abortion. These results quantify the considerable improvements in non-mortal
health outcomes flowing from legal access to abortion.
© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the
CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

 We thank the Editor Ana Balsa, two anonymous referees, Sonia Bhalotra, René Castro, Blair G. Darney, Dolores de la Mata, Hans Grönqvist, Randi
Hjalmarsson, Lakshmi Iyer, Elin Larsson, Jason Lindo, Andreea Mitrut, Carol Propper and seminar audiences at IPAS Mexico, The LACEA Health Economics
Network, the IZA Gender Workshop, CIDE Mexico, Colegio de Mexico, the Mexican Institute of Public Health, University of Gothenburg, SOFI Stockholm
University, Karolinska Institute and CSAE Oxford. We thank Raffaela Schiavon for detailed discussions regarding the practical implementation of Mexico
DF’s ILE reform and her generosity in sharing expertise. We are also grateful to Natalia Volkow at INEGI for providing access to disaggregated hospitalisation
data, Alejandro del Valle for sharing data, and Cristhian Molina for excellent research assistance. Clarke acknowledges the generous support of FONDECYT
Regular, grant number 1200634 from the Government of Chile and the institutional support ofthe Millennium Institute for MarketImperfections and Public
Policy. This paper considerably extends and partially subsumes an earlier study by these authors called “The impact of abortion legalization on fertility and
female empowerment: New evidence from Mexico”.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: dclarke@fen.uchile.cl (D. Clarke), hanna.muhlrad@ifau.uu.se (H. Mühlrad).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2020.102413
0167-6296/© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/).

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
1. Introduction
Appeals to women’s health are frequently made when
debating the merits of abortion legislation. These calls are
made by both advocates of legal abortion as well as those
advocating for abortion to become, or remain, illegal. The
arguments backing up such claims are drawn from a range
of sources, which are often correlational or based on small
or non-representative samples of women.1

In this study, we present the first population-level evi-
dence of the impact of sub-national variation in abortion

laws on maternal morbidity, as well as mortality, using the
universe of administrative health records from Mexico.2
We focus on a period in which considerable within-country
reform of abortion policy was undertaken, with both a
sweeping legalisation in the Federal District of Mexico
(Mexico DF) and increasing sanctions on (already illegal)
abortion in other regions. In this context, we are able to
determine to what extent change in abortion laws, absent

other major contraceptive revolutions, impact health indi-
cators for the population of affected women. We combine

the state-level variationover time resulting fromlegislative
changes in abortion law with high-quality vital statistics

data recording over 30 million births, 18.4 thousand mater-
nal deaths and 46 million inpatient cases for causes related

to maternal health. To seek to understand the observed
impact of abortion laws on health outcomes, we also take
advantage of richadministrative and survey data to identify

the reform’s wider impact on birth rates, judicial sen-
tencing, and on sexual behaviour, and explore potential

channels of health impacts, including improvements in the
quality of abortion care and changes in the composition of
women giving birth.
The environment under study provides a unique

opportunity to examine simultaneous expansions and con-
tractions of abortion policies.3 While much of the existing

literature on the impact of abortion—and contraceptive

1 The use of such arguments even when based on weak evidence is not
isolated to non-governmental organisations. Similar arguments are also
made by politicians. One example is a fact sheet published on the website
of the United States (US) Government’s National Cancer Institute by the
Bush administration positing an (unfounded) link between abortion and
breast cancer (Special Investigations Division, Committee of Government
Reform, House of Representatives, 2003). 2 Associations between abortion legalisation and maternal mortality
or morbidity have been documented in the medical and public health
literature for multiple countries (Benson et al., 2011), including Albania
(Sahatci, 1993), Bangladesh (Chowdhury et al., 2007), Nepal (Henderson
et al., 2013), Romania (Serbanescu et al., 1995; Stephenson et al., 1992),
Singapore (Singh and Ratnam, 2015) and South Africa (Rees et al., 1997).
Existing studies are mainly based on reviews of medical charts at selected
hospitals,for example in the US (Goldstein and Stewart, 1972; Stewart and
Goldstein, 1971; Seward et al., 1973; Kahan et al., 1975), Guyana (Nunes
and Delph, 1997), Nepal (Henderson et al., 2013) and South Africa (Mbele
et al., 2006; Jewkes et al., 2002). We are aware of no prior studies which
are based on population-level data, and based on within-country variation
in abortion reforms. 3 As we discuss at greater length in Sections 2.2–2.3 of this paper, the

change due to the initial legalisation of abortion in Mexico DF was con-
siderably larger than subsequent legislative tightenings in other Mexican

states. In the case of the constitutional changes issued by states, in each
case abortion was already illegal and any changes owe to an increased
threat of prosecution or sanction. Using the universe of legal decisions

policies more generally—focuses on expansion in access,

there are a number of papers which focus on contrac-
tions in policies. These include historical restrictions in

Romania (Pop-Eleches, 2010), the impact of parental con-
sent or notification laws targeted at adolescents in the US

(Bitler and Zavodny, 2001; Joyce and Kaestner, 1996), and
a recent hollowing out in the availability of providers due
to state-specific legislation in the US (Fischer et al., 2018;
Lindo et al., 2019). However, the legalisation of abortion
in Mexico DF, and the resulting spate of constitutional
changes increasing the harshness of sentencing of illegal
abortion, provides the opportunity to examine the impact
of a contemporaneous series of restrictive and permissive
abortion policies in a single country and time.
Reproductive health rights have been documented to
be of considerable economic significance. This fact has
been emphasised by a growing body of economic literature
which has—empirically and theoretically—demonstrated

how access to elective abortion and contraceptive meth-
ods has shaped fertility patterns, marital markets, crime,

education, the labour market and female empowerment
(e.g., Ananat et al., 2007; Bailey and Lindo, 2017; Chiappori
and Oreffice, 2008; Guldi, 2008; Mitrut and Wolff, 2011;
Myers, 2017; Pop-Eleches, 2010). The impact of abortion
laws on women’s health has received less attention, and
the causal relationship is yet to be established. To the best

of our knowledge,this is thefirst study toprovide welliden-
tified population-level evidence of the impact of abortion

legalisation on maternal morbidity and mortality based
on within-country variation in abortion availability. While
an association between abortion legalisation and lower
abortion-related complications has been documented in
previous studies, comprehensively capturing the impact

of the passage of abortion law on abortion-related mor-
bidity is a considerable challenge, especially in clandestine

settings, where under-reporting may occur (Singh et al.,
2010).4
Using two-way fixed effect (FE) models and panel event
study methods (and synthetic controls as a robustness

check), as well as recent advances in a literature exam-
ining causal estimation with time varying policy reform

(Rambachan and Roth, 2019; Goodman-Bacon, 2018), we
observe consistent evidence to suggestthatthe legalisation
of abortion in Mexico DF brought about a sharp reduction in
fertility (by 8%), haemorrhage in early pregnancy (by 35%)

and abortion-related morbidity (by 20%). Event study esti-
mates examining increases in sanctions on (already illegal)

abortion point to much smaller effects on these variables,
which are generally not statistically significant. In general,
we observe impacts on maternal mortality, which are hard
to consistently sign given that they are considerably less
precise, suggesting that when only examining impacts of

in the country, we document evidence suggesting that these reforms
increase the average length of sentences handed down to women. 4 Maternal mortality is considered the “tip of the iceberg”, where the
mass consists of maternal morbidity (Loudon, 1992). In many settings,
analyses of the impact of abortion on population health focuses only on
maternal mortality due to a lack of universal health records measuring
maternal morbidity.
2

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
abortion law on maternal mortality, analyses failto account
for the full weight of abortion reform on women’s health.
Previous studies on Mexico’s abortion reform laws
include legal and ethical overviews (Johnson, 2013;
Madrazo, 2009), qualitative studies on abortion provision

(Contreras et al., 2011; Schiavon et al., 2010), quantita-
tive studies on abortion services and patient characteristics

using data from selected hospitals or surveys (Mondragón

y Kalb et al., 2011; Becker et al., 2013), and fertil-
ity trends using vital statistics (Gutierrez-Vazquez and

Parrado, 2015).5 This paper contributes to previous studies
by examining the causal impacts of abortion legalisation,
as well as regressive law changes, on women’s health and
well-being using the full power of vital statistics data,
including administrative microdata on births, maternal
morbidity, maternal mortality, and judicial statistics on
penal matters. In addition, we examine heterogeneous
effects of the reform as well as potential mechanisms such
as usage and knowledge of contraceptive methods.
There is a large unmet need for family planning in
low- and middle-income countries (Sully et al., 2019). Yet,
the evidence on the impacts of reproductive health rights

including safe and legal abortions in these settings, espe-
cially building on microdata, is very scarce. In light of this,

our study provides strong evidence that abortion legalisa-
tion in an emerging economy leads to rapid and discernible

changes in political behaviour, aggregate fertility rates,
and (significant improvements in) maternal health. These
results provide a number of important policy lessons for
jurisdictions considering changes in abortion laws.
2. Background
2.1. Unsafe abortions and maternal mortality in Mexico
Globally, maternal mortality has declined from 385
maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in 1990 to 211
deaths per 100,000 live births in 2017. The overwhelming

majority of these deaths occurred in low-income coun-
tries. During the same period in Mexico, there has been

a similar decline in maternal mortality from 88 to 33
deaths per 100,000 live births (Rodríguez-Aguilar, 2018;
Bongaarts, 2016). However, Mexico has still not achieved
its 2015 United Nations Millennium Development Goal: a
ratio of below 22 deaths per 100,000 live births. In Mexico,
the highest prevalence of maternal mortality is found in
metropolitan areas and among women aged 20–34. Rates

of maternal mortality are especially high in socially vul-
nerable populations across Mexico. Areas with the highest

rates of maternal mortality exhibit some of the low-
5 In examining the abortion reform and fertility outcomes, Gutierrez-
Vazquez and Parrado (2015) use national vital statistics to examine the

effect onfertility across ages. Due to theuse of a limitedamount ofdata and
limitations inherent in the empirical design, one cannot assign a causal
interpretation to the results with confidence. More specifically, only three
different years of data are used (1990, 2000 and 2010). In a study by Koch
et al. (2015) maternal mortality is found to increase in areas with more
liberal abortion laws. Koch et al. (2015), however, has received strong
criticismfor highlymisleading and inaccurate data selection (Darney et al.,
2017).

est levels of government expenditure on maternal health
(Pérez-Pérez et al., 2019).

Abortion-related mortality represents a substantial pro-
portion of all maternal deaths in Mexico, accounting for

7.2% of all maternal deaths between 2000–2008 (Schiavon
et al., 2012). While there has been a downward trend in

maternal mortality in Mexico between 1990–2008, mater-
nal mortality attributed to abortion-related causes has not

exhibited similar declines during this period. The majority
of these deaths occur in women without health insurance
(Schiavon et al., 2012).

The rate of abortion-related mortality varies substan-
tially across regions in Mexico. The highest rates can be

found in some of the poorest states, such as Chiapas and
Guerrero with as many as 90 and 140 deaths per 100,000
hospitalisations, respectively. This can be compared to Baja

California Sur with only 9 deaths per 100,000 hospitali-
sations. Yet, high rates of abortion-related mortality are

not exclusively observed in poor states across Mexico. In
Mexico DF,for example,the abortion-related mortality rate
was 38 per 100,000 hospitalisations between 2000–2008
(Schiavon et al., 2012).

Unsafe abortion procedures account for most abortion-
related mortality (Schiavon et al., 2012). Rates of unsafe

abortion are particularly high in the Latin America and
Caribbean region with an estimated 4.2 million unsafe
induced abortions performed each year (World Health
Organization, 2011). This region also exhibits some of
the world’s most conservative laws on abortion (United
Nations, 2014). However, restrictive laws on abortion do
not translate to lower rates of induced abortion but are
instead associated with higher rates of unsafe abortion and

correspondingly higher rates of abortion-related morbid-
ity and mortality, compared to settings with more liberal

access policies (Guttmacher Institute, 2012).

Indeed, the rate of induced abortion in Mexico is con-
sidered high internationally (Becker, 2013). Despite high

rates of contraceptive use, the estimated rate of induced
abortions increased between 1990, with 25 abortions per
1000 fertile-aged women, and 2006, with 33 abortions per
1000 women, (Juarez et al., 2008). Many of these induced
abortions were performed in clandestine conditions and

often in unsafe settings (Guttmacher Institute, 2012). Med-
ical records from public hospitals in Mexico show high

rates of abortion-related complications with an estimated
150,000 women treated for complications in 2006 alone
(Juarez et al., 2008).
2.2. The 2007 legal interruption of pregnancy reform in
Mexico DF
Since the 1970s, women’s rights advocates in Mexico
have been promoting women’s health rights, including
access to safe abortions (Kulczycki, 2011). To address the

issue of unsafe abortions as a preventable cause of mater-
nal morbidity and its huge burden on public health system,

a National Pro-choice Alliance in Mexico was established in
2000 to promote women’s sexual and reproductive health
rights. This movement was supported by a wide range of
groups, including healthcare professionals, women’s rights
groups and activists, politicians, academics, and Catholics
3

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
with pro-choice views (Johnson, 2013; Madrazo, 2009;
Kulczycki, 2011; Blanco-Mancilla, 2011).6

With the support of the leftist Party of the Demo-
cratic Revolution, Mexico DF’s legislative assembly voted

to legalise elective abortion (termed legal interruption of
pregnancy or ILE for its acronym in Spanish) on April 24,
2007 (Kulczycki, 2011). The ILE reform was signed into law
the following day and published in the Official Gazette of
the Federal District on April 26, 2007 (Ciudad de México,
2007). This immediately permitted women above the age
of 18 to request an abortion at up to 12 weeks of gestation
without restriction and free of charge. Access for minors
requires the consent of a parent or guardian. Under this law,
induced abortion was made legal in both the public and
private healthcare sectors (requiring payment in private
clinics).

Immediate implementation was made possible by col-
laboration between the Ministry of Health of Mexico

DF (MOH-DF), members of the health department and
international NGOs, which had designed a comprehensive
program for public provision of abortion services called
the “The ILE Program” and its implementation even before
the law was passed (Singh et al., 2012). As such, abortion

services were made available via public clinics immedi-
ately after the law was passed in April 2007, although with

lower capacity and efficiency compared to current condi-
tions. Abortion services were also quickly available in the

private healthcare sector (Blanco-Mancilla, 2011). Addi-
tionally, under this law sexual education in schools was

improved and post-abortion contraceptives were made

freely available directly from the health clinics that pro-
vided abortions (Contreras et al., 2011). On August 29,

2008 the decision to pass the ILE law was ratified by the
SupremeCourt ofMexico,makingMexico DF,together with
Cuba and Uruguay, the most liberal jurisdiction in the Latin

American and Caribbean region in terms of abortion legis-
lation (Fraser, 2015).

Any abortions conducted in publicly-run clinics are pro-
vided free of charge to residents of Mexico DF.Women with

residency outside Mexico DF can also access the public pro-
vision of abortion through the MOH-DF but are charged

based on a sliding fee scale depending on the woman’s
socioeconomic background. In 2010, 74% of all women
who received an abortion through the public healthcare

sector were women living in Mexico DF, 24% were liv-
ing in the state of Mexico (which shares a border with

Mexico DF) and 2% were living in other states (Mondragón

y Kalb et al., 2011). The age profile of women seeking abor-
tions largely mirrors the age-profile of births, occurring at

slightly greater rates among younger (under 25 years) and
older (above 36 years) groups (Appendix Figure A1).

6 The alliance was successful in rapidly moving the women’s health
agenda forward in the historically conservative setting of Mexico City

using anumber ofdifferent strategies including the involvement ofhealth-
care officials, hospitals and other healthcare providers. This was not only

important for building support for the reform, but also to facilitate a
smooth implementation of the abortion program. The alliance was also

successful in establishing a strong presence in the public media for pro-
moting women’s health rights (Kulczycki, 2011; Johnson, 2013).

Records from public hospitals show that in 2007, when
the reform was implemented, more than 7000 abortion
procedures were performed at 14 selected MOH-DF clinics.
Over the years, the MOH-DF abortion program expanded
its services and became more efficient in meeting the high
demand for elective abortion. The MOH-DF program offers
both surgical and medical abortion procedures and is the
main provider of medical abortion in Mexico DF (Winikoff

and Sheldon, 2012). The large shift from 25% of all abor-
tion procedures being medical in 2007 to as much as 74%

in 2011 has played a key part in meeting the demand and
reducing complications and side-effects (Becker, 2013).7
As of 2015, approximately 150,000 abortions were carried
out at MOH-DF clinics.8 Information regarding the private
provision of abortion services is limited due to a lack of

supervision of the private market for legal abortion ser-
vices (Becker, 2013). Despite the fact that safe abortion, at

no or low cost, is provided by the public health system in
Mexico DF, women do seek abortion services within the
private sector. A descriptive study by Schiavon et al. (2012)
suggests that private abortion services are provided at a
high cost (USD 157–505) and quality of care is inferior to

that in the public sector, given that the less safe and effi-
cient “dilation and curettage” is used as the main method

in the private sector (in 71% of cases).
2.3. Regressive law changes following the ILE Reform
Following Mexico DF’s ILE reform, a number of states
almost immediately began a series of counter legislation
to change the respective sections of their constitutions or

penal codes, defining the beginning of human life as occur-
ring at conception. These legal responses often directly

referenced Mexico DF’s ILE reform.9 And even in cases
where the ILE reform was not directly referred to in counter

legislation it seems highly likely that it was a defining fac-
tor. For example, in the 20 years prior to the ILE reform

there had been only two constitutionally defined changes
to the articles relating to abortion in the penal codes of all
states in Mexico (Gamboa Montejano and Valdés Robledo,
2014), compared to 18 changes between June 21, 2008 and
November 17, 2009. Importantly, these reforms resulted

in constitutional changes which recognised life as begin-
ning at conception, opening the door for potential homicide

charges. In order to understand the precise nature of law
changes, we conducted a side-by-side reading of penal
codes from pre- and post-reform for each state undertaking

7 Misoprostol alone was the main regimen for medical abortions per-
formed in MOH-DF clinics until 2011 when Mifepristone (combined with

Misoprostol) was introduced. This change made the medical abortion pro-
cedures provided by the ILE program more efficient and safe. 8 To put this in context, note that the quantity of abortions per year

(adjusted for population) is similar to the quantity in the US. In 2010, for
example, 16,945 abortions were provided by the ILE program. In 2010
Mexico DF had approximately 8.55 million inhabitants. Thus, adjusted
to the US population in 2010 (308.7 million), this would imply 611,803
abortions. In reality, 765,651 abortions were reported in the US in 2010
(Pazol et al., 2014). 9 For example, the constitutional decree issued by the state of Nayarit
when changing their penal code explicitly refers to the changes in the
penal and civil code of Mexico DF (Gobierno de Nayarit, 2009, p. 14).
4

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
an abortion reform. The nature of changes implied by the

reform are documented in Appendix Table A1. As we dis-
play there, of the states undertaking a regressive reform all

but six formally altered their penal codes to change sanc-
tions in the case of proven abortions, while the remaining

six only altered their state constitution to recognise life as
beginning at conception.
In Appendix Figure A2, we display the geographical

distribution of law changes (progressive, regressive or neu-
tral) over the period under study. The only progressive

reform refers to Mexico DF’s ILE reform, while 18 states
made regressive changes (i.e., legal tightenings) after the
initial reform. We compiled the exact dates the reforms
were passed into law on a state-by-state basis, and these
are displayed in Appendix Table A2. To the best of our
knowledge, no centralised record of the dates and laws
that were altered in the post ILE era exists, and as such we
compiled these records from our reading of legal source
documents. In Section 4 of this paper we return to how we
use the geographic and temporal variation in the passage
of laws in our identification strategy.
2.4. The potential channels for impacts of abortion
reform

Legislative reforms to abortion policies could poten-
tially impact health though a number of channels. We

lay these out conceptually below, without yet seeking to
assess their relative importance or relevance in explaining

observed outcomes. We then move on to assess the likeli-
hood that particular channels canexplainobserved impacts

of abortion reformonmaternal health (in the context ofthis
paper) in Section 5.3.

1. Unsafe abortions are shifted to safe legal condi-
tions. This channel is relevant for individuals who would

abort when abortion is illegal, and also would abort when
abortion is legal.As discussed in Section 2.1 unsafe abortion
is thoughtto be a significant determinant of maternal death
and hospitalisation, with evidence that a lack of access to

safe abortion shifts the demand for abortion towards clan-
destine and unsafe conditions (Haddad and Nour, 2009).

To the degree that legalising abortion shifts clandestine
abortions at risk of complications to sanitary conditions

with lower risk, there exists a hypothesised direct chan-
nel through which abortion reform may impact women’s

health. In this channel, holding all else constant, abortions
which would have occurred whether abortion was legal or
not should imply a direct improvement in women’s health
when abortion is legalised. We refer to this as the “quality
of care channel”.
2. Undesired pregnancies are avoided. This channel is

relevant for individuals who would not abort when abor-
tionis illegal, but wouldabort whenabortionis legalised. To

the degree that abortion being illegal discourages women
who would otherwise have sought to discontinue their
pregnancy by seeking an abortion, changes in laws will
shiftthe demand for abortion. This channel, which we refer
to as the “demand” channel could, theoretically at least,
have varying impacts on women’s health. For (a) undesired
pregnancies which would have resulted in poor maternal

health outcomes, the legalisation of abortion and result-
ing avoidance of risky pregnancies will, all else constant,

improve maternal health. However, for (b) undesired preg-
nancies which would not have resulted in poor maternal

health outcomes, the legalisation of abortion may shift
maternal health outcomes if abortion—even in safe legal
conditions—implies some risk of complications.10
3. The composition of women becoming pregnant
changes. This channel is relevant for individuals who
would not abort when abortion is illegal, and would also
not abort when abortion is legal. This channel is relevant
only to the degree that the population of women giving
birthfollowing abortionreformwill consist ofmore women
who desire to take their pregnancy to term, regardless of
whether abortionis legal.As women’shealthcomplications
arise throughout pregnancy, changes in the composition
of women becoming pregnant and taking a pregnancy to
term may result in changes in rates of health complications
observed at the population level. Ex ante, this selection
process has ambiguous impacts on maternal health as it
depends on the nature the selectivity. We will refer to this
as the “selection channel”.
3. Data
We construct a balanced panel recording morbidity and
mortality outcomes, birth rates and legal outcomes for

each of Mexico’s 32 states between 2001–2015. In prin-
cipal models we consider a monthly panel; however, we

also generate more temporally aggregate data (by year
and by trimester) to include the universe of cases where
monthly records are not available, as laid out below. We
construct this panel from a large number of administrative
microdata bases covering hundreds of millions of records,
which are described at more length in Appendix B and
summarised below. Along with outcomes generated from
administrative data, we collect a number of measures of
sexual behaviour from survey data, time varying controls,
and the exposure to the ILE reform or subsequent legal
changes.
Health outcomes. We observe all morbidity events

resulting in a hospital inpatient visit to any public hospi-
tal in Mexico. Depending on the hospital type (state run

or social security run),11 the microdata format varies and
as a result we can consistently group records only for the
years 2004–2015, and only with a yearly total. Given this,
we provide two sets of results: one based only on visits to
state-run hospitals, as in this case we can calculate monthly
10 As we discuss later in the paper, this second channel appears to be
quite unlikely given that abortion in safe settings has very low rates of

associated morbidity and mortality. In fact, induced abortions in safe set-
tings are considered to be “one of the safest procedures in contemporary

practice” with a mortality rate below 1 per 100,000 procedures (Grimes,
2005). 11 The Mexican health system consists of public and private hospitals.
Among public hospitals, there are two broad classes: those administered
by social security providers for workers in the formal sector and those

administered directly by the federal or state governments for individ-
uals without social security coverage. Hospitals in the latter class are

principally administered by the Secretariat of Health of federal or state
governments and, as such, below we refer to these as Secretariat of Health
hospitals.
5

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
aggregates for the longer period of 2001–2015, and another
based on yearly records for the shorter 2004–2015 period

when all hospitalisation data is observed.We similarly con-
sider leakage to the private system using administrative

records from all private hospitals.

Our principal measures of interest are maternal mor-
bidity outcomes, classified according to International

Classification of Diseases tenth revision (ICD-10) codes,12
plausibly impacted by abortion. Specifically, these are (a)
“abortion-related morbidity” (ICD-10 codes O02–O08) and
(b) haemorrhage in early pregnancy (ICD code O20).13
The remainder of the ICD codes are not examined as it is

unlikely that they are sequelae of abortion (e.g., eclamp-
sia or pre-eclampsia), or they are morbidities occurring in

the puerperium period, and so are unable to be sequelae of
abortion. The two codes are not chosen arbitrarily by the
authors but rather in line with the fact that haemorrhage

and incomplete abortion are the two most common com-
plications of unsafe abortion (World Health Organization,

2018). We provide a full breakdown of all ICD codes related
to pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (the ICD-10 O
codes) in Appendix Table A3, which documents both the
considerable frequency of the two chosen classes and the
implausibility of impacts on other variables. Finally, as an

exploratory analysis, we aim to measure mental health out-
comes of women. In practice, the only way that we can

consistently measure this in our data is via the code F53
which captures post-partum depression.14
We consider a number of placebo outcomes and do so

in a number of ways. A first placebo test consists of con-
sidering a (presumably) unaffected morbidity cause within

the same ICD class (the O codes), namely late term obstet-
ric complications (ICD codes O70–O75). While this is not a

perfect placebo insofar as it may be impacted by a changing

composition of mothers (via the “selection” channel indi-
cated earlier), it is unlikely to be mechanically related to

abortion, so provides a useful comparison to our main mor-
bidity outcomes.Additionally, andto completely isolate the

placebo tests from potential changes in the composition of
12 It is important to note that the procedure of assigning ICD codes for a
hospitalisation is typically implemented by a particular person or persons
in charge of coding diagnoses in hospitals (such as an epidemiologist or
a hospital employee). This coding is made based on their reading of the

treating team’s charts; it is not determined by the team actually treat-
ing the patient (Velasco Sustaita, Undated). Moreover, the ICD coding is

typically processed after the patientis discharged from the hospital. Anec-
dotal evidence suggests that the prosecution of women for the crime of

abortion usually occurs during the hospital stay, after either a clinician,
nurse or social worker have raised their “suspicion” to the police. There is
no ICD code for induced illegal abortion in the ICD-10 classifications and
indeed evidence from other contexts suggests that, if anything, providers

may seek to record abortion-related morbidity within sub-codes of ICD-
10 classifications (such as recording abortions as spontaneous instead

of induced) rather than classifying it as an alternative code (Suh, 2014).
The authors are grateful to Dr Raffaela Schiavon for providing very useful
background details in correspondence. 13 For a longer discussion on classification of abortion-related morbidity
see Schiavon et al. (2012) and World Health Organization (2018). 14 We explored using external causes of morbidity to capture suicide

attempts; however, the inpatient data from Mexico only consistently pro-
vides a single ICD code capturing the principal cause of hospitalisation,

while external causes are classified as a secondary ICD code. Thus, these
external causes are not recorded consistently in administrative data.

mothers, we consider a larger number of placebo outcomes
coming from other ICD classifications.15
While our main interest here is to documentthe impacts
of abortion reform on the much larger pool of morbidity
outcomes, we additionally consider maternal mortality as
recorded in Mexico’s complete vital statistics registers. We
thus calculate the number of all maternal deaths in each
state andtimeperiodand, additionally, only thosematernal

deaths classified as owing to abortion. Additional discus-
sion ofthe generation ofthese data, as well as the recording

of microdata bases, is provided in Appendix B.
Births. In order to benchmark the Mexican abortion
reforms’ impact on birth rates with respect to the wider
literature, we also require aggregate data on birth rates by

state. We generate these state-level measures from pub-
licly available microdata on births provided by the National

Institute of Statistics and Geography, known by its Spanish
acronym INEGI. We use each birth register for women aged
15–49 over the time period between 2001–2013, a sample
of 30,341,376 births. As discussed in more detail in the Data
Appendix, we can only observe birth records up to 2013 as

we follow the procedure suggested by the National Popu-
lation Council (known by its Spanish acronym CONAPO) of

using birth registers up to four years following each birth

date to ensure that we capture births even if they are reg-
istered with a considerable delay. We use these same data

to measure average characteristics of mothers and fathers

(where registered) to examine any changes in the compo-
sition of parents following abortion reforms. In both the

case of births and the case of health outcomes, in order to

calculate rates of occurrence we record the state-level pop-
ulation in each year for all women aged 15–49 provided by

CONAPO.

Additional measures. We additionally collect a num-
ber of other state- and time-varying measures to examine

potential mechanisms of action of the reform or to dis-
miss alternative possible explanations of observed impacts.

These measures consist of (a) all first legal decisions made
by the Mexican judiciary related to abortion compiled from
microdata collected by INEGI and released as Mexico’s

Judicial Statistics on Penal Matters;(b)information on con-
traceptive use and sexual behaviour from the Mexican

Family Life Survey (MxFLS); and (c) time-varying con-
trols to capture possible confounders of abortion policy,

namely education, health investment and access to for-
mal healthcare among the state population, access to the

public insurance program Seguro Popular, economic devel-
opment, and women’s social inclusion. These controls are

fully described in Data Appendix B, as well as in the discus-
sion of summary statistics below.

Summary statistics. Summary statistics of principal
outcomes (maternal morbidity, mortality and births) are
provided in Table 1. The total number of cases of each
morbidity class are described in Panel A, and mortality

15 Specifically, these are diseases of the ear and mastoid processes; neo-
plasms; endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases; diseases of the

blood and blood-forming organs; diseases of the nervous system; and
diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. We discuss these at greater
length in Section 5.3.
6

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
Table 1
Summary statistics for month by year by state specifications
Variable Obs. Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max.
Panel A: Morbidity outcomes
Total Number of Deliveries in Public
Hospitals

5760 1455.9 1282.8 143 8496

Total Inpatient Cases for ICD O codes,
except births

5760 1276.3 1002.8 139 6271

Total Inpatient Cases for Abortion-Related
Causes

5760 268.7 232.9 27 1573

Total Inpatient Cases for Haemorrhage
Early in Pregnancy

5760 31.4 27.2 0 207

Total Inpatient Days for Abortion-Related
Causes

5760 361.3 327.4 28 2168

Total Inpatient Days for Haemorrhage
Early in Pregnancy

5760 64.7 63.0 0 463

Total Inpatient Cases for Obstetric
Complications

5760 36.0 51.1 0 375

Total Inpatient Cases for Post-Partum
Depression

5760 0.1 0.3 0 6

Panel B: Mortality outcomes
Total Number of Maternal Deaths 6144 2.98 3.26 0 25
Total Number of Maternal Deaths due to
Abortion

6144 0.21 0.50 0 4

Panel C: Demographic outcomes
Population of 15–49 Year-old Women 6144 864691 743706 116430 4228223
Total Number of Births 4992 6078 4904 719 28546
Birth rate per 1000 women 4992 7 1 5 13
Each observation is a state × year × month cell. Mexico is composed of 32 States. The number of cells varies due to the number of years and months of data
available. In Panel A, morbidity data is displayed for 12 months in 12 years (2004–2015). Values are generated from all inpatient cases as classified from
microdata from the primary care (hospital) records from all public hospitals administered by the Secretariat of Health (social security system hospitals do
not report month of hospitalisation). Each type of morbidity is classified by ICD-10 codes. In Panel B, mortality outcomes are displayed for 12 months in
16 years (2001–2016). In Panel C, data on population is displayed for 12 months in 16 years (2001–2016), and data on births is displayed for 12 months
in 13 years (2001–2013). Following CONAPO, the last four years of birth outcomes are suppressed to account for reporting outside of the period of birth.
State × year summary statistics including social security system hospitals are provided in Appendix Table A4.
outcomes, both for all maternal deaths and those only
classified as owing to abortion, are provided in Panel B.
State by year × month averages of the number of births
and births per 1000 fertile-aged women are displayed
in Panel C of Table 1. On average, morbidity outcomes
are various orders of magnitude higher than mortality

outcomes. For example, the average quantity of hospitali-
sations for abortion-related causes was 269 per state and

month versus 3 maternal deaths on average, or 0.2 mater-
nal deaths when considering only those classified as owing

to abortive causes. In this table, morbidity data is recorded
only based on public hospital data where the month of the
visitis recorded. As we will discuss at greater length below,
we will also consider variation by state and year allowing us
to capture the full universe of health outcomes from both
state run and social security run hospitals (see Appendix
Table A4 for summary statistics), and control variables are
summarised in Appendix Table A5.
Raw trends of principal maternal health outcomes are

provided in Fig. 1, pointing to important shifts in inpa-
tient visits related to maternal health following the ILE

reform. Fig. 1(a) and (b) document the quantity of monthly

inpatient cases for abortion-related morbidity and haem-
orrhage in early pregnancy in Mexico DF for states that

adopted a subsequent legal tightening and for states with
no subsequent legal changes. We observe reductions in the

absolute quantity of cases in Mexico DF in both cases fol-
lowing the ILE reform in April 2007 (indicated as a vertical

red line). Panels (a) and (b) are based only on hospitali-
sation data from Secretary of Health hospitals. When we

additionally extend to include social security hospitals in

panels (c)-(f), observing yearly variation only, we see a sim-
ilarpattern withreductions intotalhospitalisations (panels

(c) and (d)), and rates of hospitalisations for fertile-aged
women (panels (e) and (f)).
4. Methodology
We aim to examine the impact of the ILE reform and
regressive law changes, compared with outcomes in states
in which no reform was implemented. We thus begin
by estimating the following two “two-way fixed effect”
specifications16:
Healthst =  ̨0 +  ̨1ILEst + X

st1 + s + t

+ (s × month) + εst (1)
Healthst = ˇ0 + ˇ1Regressivest + X
st2

+ s + t + (s × month) + st. (2)

16 We estimate these models separately; however, all results docu-
mented in this paper are robust to estimating a single model including

both the ILE and regressive variables. Full results in this set-up are docu-
mented in Clarke and Mühlrad (2018).

7

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

Fig. 1. Raw trends in abortion-related morbidity and haemorrhage in early pregnancy. Notes: Figures present the total number of discharges due to
abortion-related morbidity (left-hand panels) and haemorrhage in early pregnancy (right-hand panels) in Mexico DF (which adopted the ILE reform),
states which had a later tightening of abortion laws, and all other states. Panels (a) and (b) plot monthly trends based on all discharges from Secretariat of
Health hospitals given that these are the only registers which record month and year of discharge. Panels (c) and (d) plot yearly trends based on all public
hospital discharges (both Secretariat of Health hospitals and social security hospitals which do not report month of discharge), and panels (e) and (f) plot
yearly discharges based on all public hospital data expressed per 1000 women of fertile age. The dotted vertical line is plotted in April 2007, the date of
passage of the ILE abortion reform, and wide-scale rollout of available abortions. Residualised plots and longer yearly plots based on panels (a) and (b) are
provided as Appendix Figures A3 and A4, respectively.

8

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

Here Health refers to average rates of morbidity or mor-
tality in state s at time t, and ILE and regressive refer to

the post-ILE and post-regressive law changes in affected
states. Our parameters of interest are  ̨1 from Eq. (1) and

ˇ1 from Eq. (2). In the case of specification (1), the estima-
tion sample consists of Mexico DF (which adopts ILE) and

all non-reforming states. In the case of specification (2),the

sample consists of all states which adopt regressive abor-
tion laws and all non-reforming states. We include state

and year fixed effects as s and t, respectively, as well

as state-specific monthly fixed effects (s × month) to cap-
ture any potential state-specific seasonality, and examine

stability to the inclusion of the time-varying controls Xst
listed in Section B.2. In initial specifications, time t refers to
monthly measures. This allows us to examine fine-grained
temporal variation in outcomes in all hospitals run by the
Mexican Secretariat of Health. However, to ensure that
these results are also observed in the full universe of public
health records, we also consider specifications where time
t refers to yearly cells including all data.
In this two-way FE specification, the ILE variable in Eq.

(1) is an indicator which switches from 0 to 1 at a par-
ticular point in time; however, the regressive indicator

in Eq. (2) switches from 0 to 1 at varying times depend-
ing on the state. In the case of heterogeneous treatment

effects and time-varying adoption, this single-coefficient

model can considerably mis-estimate the average treat-
ment effect on the treated (ATT), given that already treated

units act as controls in future periods (Goodman-Bacon,
2018). While this is not a concern for our estimate of  ̨1, it
is for our estimate of ˇ1. Accordingly, we will (a) document
the parameter decomposition derived in Goodman-Bacon
(2018) and (b) estimate event study specifications which
avoid these potential biases. There are 32 states in Mexico
(including the Mexico DF), and these laws are defined at

the level of the state. In order to account for the possi-
bility of unobserved correlations of outcomes for women

within a state, standard errors are clustered by state using
a clustered wild bootstrap.

Our outcomes ofinterestfor this procedure are the mea-
sures of maternal morbidity and mortality discussed in

Section 3, as well as birth rates. We additionally consider
exploratory analyses examining post-partum depression.
We thus implement the procedure for a measure of all
abortion-related morbidity, morbidity due to haemorrhage
in early pregnancy, post-partum depression,total maternal
mortality, and maternal mortality due to abortion. In each
case in the main outcomes, we focus on rates of morbidity
and mortality per the population of fertile-aged women.
We express our outcomes in this way for two reasons. The
first is that it allows us to capture the full effect of the
reform. As we will show that the abortion reform reduces

fertility, if we express our outcomes as morbidity or mor-
tality per live birth this is equivalent to a partial impact,

removing any impact of the reform which flows from the
ability to avoid undesired, and potentially risky, births.17 In
practice, we are interested in the total impact ofthe reform,
17 It is also important to note that the ILE reform included the option
of accessing free contraceptives after undergoing an abortion procedure,

which consists of the reduction in morbidity and mortality
due to fewer births, as well as any direct impact the reform
may have on the composition of mothers giving birth. The

second reason is thatthis focus allows us to ignore any chal-
lenges arising from the endogenous decision of whether or

not to engage in legal abortion. If we instead report the
impact of the law on rates of morbidity and mortality per
live birth, we will be confounding our estimates due to the
fact that a non-random group of women choose to proceed
with births following the reform, and this group may be
selectively more or less healthy than the women who elect
to abort.We address changes inthe compositionofmothers
explicitly in Section 5.3 of this paper.
For two-way FE estimates to capture the causal effects
of abortion laws, we require a parallel trend assumption
to hold, or that outcomes in each of the “Regressive”, “ILE”
and untreated states would have evolved similarly in the
absence of abortion reforms. We provide a partial test of
this, and additionally quantify any dynamic reform effects,

by estimating the following panel event study specifica-
tions:

Healthst = 0 +

36
j=−36
ı−jILEs,t+j + X
st1

+ s + t + (s × month) + st (3)

Healthst = 1 +

36
k=−36
−kRegressives,t+k

+ X
st2 + s + t + (s × month) +

st. (4)

We normalise both ı and

setting ı−1 = 0 and
−1 =

0. These event study specifications are increasingly com-
mon in panel settings, and here we adopt the notation of

Freyaldenhoven et al. (2018), using  to denote the precise

moment in which treatment status changes. In this speci-
fication, we are interested in the leads and the lags of the

policy changes, where leads capture any prevailing trends

prior to the reform and lags show the change in health out-
comes following the reform’s implementation. In the main

specifications (3) and (4), we presentthe modelfor morbid-
ity data available between 2001 to 2015, which allows us

to consider a large number of monthly lags and leads. We
use 36 monthly lags and leads, where the final lag and lead
indicates all periods beyond this time. As was the case with
two-way FE models, we also examine robustness to using
yearly data with all hospitalisations. In this case we are able

to use data exclusively from between 2004–2015, aggre-
gated to a yearly-level, and as such we estimate three leads

and eight lags of the ILE reform, and five leads and seven
lags of regressive law changes. We can estimate additional
lags for regressive reforms in this case given that there
is greater variation in treatment timing.18 In the case of
which could also impact birth rates. We discuss this at greater length in
Section 5.3. 18 Practical details are discussed in Clarke and Tapia Schythe (2020).
9

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

mortality or fertility where longer periods of data are avail-
able, lags and leads are modified in yearly event studies to

provide a fully saturated model in each case. In one case

where parallel pre-trends appear less convincing, we con-
duct a newly described estimation and inference procedure

known as “Honest DD” to examine possible implications
of violations of the parallel trend assumption (Rambachan
and Roth, 2019).
It is important to note here that unbiased estimation
of reform impacts hinges, pivotally, on the assumption of

(conditional) parallel trends, and on a stable unit treat-
ment value assumption (SUTVA) implying no spillovers

to untreated states. We address the SUTVA explicitly in

Section 5.3 where we consider whether we observe appre-
ciable policy spillovers. As always, the parallel trends

assumption is something that cannot be tested formally
given the unobserved counterfactual state for treated areas
in the post-treatment period. Thus, the appearance of any
simultaneous reforms only in treatment areas would result
in biased estimates of reform impacts. Nevertheless, as
discussed above, we aim to reduce the likelihood of such
factors by controlling for time-varying factors (including
the Seguro Popular rollout), and we additionally consider a
range of placebo tests to determine whether we observe
similar patterns in variables which plausibly should not
respond to abortion reforms.
5. Results
5.1. Abortion laws and maternal morbidity and mortality
5.1.1. Estimated impacts on maternal morbidity
Two-way FE estimates (which for simplicity hereafter
we will refer to as “DD” estimates given the similarity to
double differencemodels) ofthe impact ofthe legal reforms
on morbidity are presented in Table 2. All coefficients are
cast as the effect of law changes on morbidity per 1000
women. Columns 1–2 are baseline DD models including
only time and state fixed effects, while columns 3–4 add
in time-varying controls described previously. We present
results for Eq. (1) in Panel A, and for Eq. (2) in Panel B. On
average, compared with non-reform states, the ILE reform
resulted in a reduction in morbidity by approximately 0.06

to 0.08 cases per 1000 women (per month) when consider-
ing all abortion-related morbidity and 0.013 to 0.016 cases

per 1000 women (per month) when considering the inci-
dence of haemorrhage in early pregnancy. When compared

to average rates of morbidities, this is approximately a 20%

reduction in abortion-related morbidity and a 35% reduc-
tion in rates of haemorrhage in early pregnancy. Note that

these large effects were notable even in raw trends dis-
played in Fig. 1.

In the case of subsequent restrictive reforms, we do not

find evidence to suggest that these reforms shifted mor-
bidity outcomes. For abortion-related morbidity and for

haemorrhage in early pregnancy, we find no significant
impacts across specifications reported in Table 2. When
instead of the total number of cases we examine the total
number ofinpatient days (Appendix TableA6), we similarly
observe a large reduction following Mexico’s ILE reform

and no significant, or consistently signed, impactin the case
of regressive reforms.
Fig. 2a presents event study evidence for haemorrhage

in early pregnancy, and Fig. 2b presents event study esti-
mates for abortion-related morbidity. In both cases, the

left-hand panel shows the lag and lead coefficients for
Mexico DF surrounding the ILE reform (Eq. (3)), and the
right-hand panel shows the coefficients for regressive
states (Eq. (4)). In Fig. 2a we observe an immediate sharp
decline in rates of haemorrhage in Mexico DF following the
adoption of ILE. Additionally, we observe little evidence
of prevailing differences in treated and untreated states
before the reform in all leads. In the case of regressive states
(Panel (b)), we observe a similar quite flat profile prior to
the reform. Following the reform, we observe no similar
reduction in rates of haemorrhage early in pregnancy as

that observed in Mexico DF, with no lag terms being statis-
tically distinguishable from zero at 95% significance levels.

These results support evidence from the medical literature
that haemorrhage is one of the major drivers of maternal
morbidity and mortality following unsafe abortions (World
Health Organization, 2011), as the appearance of a legal
and safe alternative to clandestine abortion resulted in

an immediate sharp reduction in hospitalisations result-
ing from haemorrhage early in pregnancy. Moreover, we

observe that these reductions occur very quickly follow-
ing the moment that abortion was legalised, suggesting an

immediate effect of safe legal abortion on women’s health
outcomes.

When considering rates of abortion-related morbid-
ity, event studies document larger prevailing (pre-reform)

differences between Mexico DF and untreated states,
although these are largely driven by a number of monthly
fluctuations greater than two years prior to the reform.19
This agrees with simple trends in outcomes documented in
Fig. 1, which suggest a number of relatively sharper jumps
observed in Mexico DF prior to 2005 that were not seen in
the rest ofthe country. However,these do not seem to point

to radically different pre-reform trends but rather cycli-
cal outliers. In the case of states which altered legislation

in response to ILE, we observe very little evidence of an
impact of these reforms on abortion-related morbidity in

Fig. 2b. In both the pre- and post-reform period, all esti-
mates are not statistically distinguishable from zero and

are centred around a null impact. In the case of abortion-
related morbidity, itis importantto note thatthe procedure

used for abortions realised under the auspices of ILE has
changed over time, which may partially explain the delay
in observed impacts on morbidity. Initially, the majority

of abortions were performed by surgical procedures com-
pared to medical abortions (25%). This gradually changed in

subsequent years, withmedical abortionprocedures reach-
ing 74% in 2011, and the use of dilation and curettage

was eliminated entirely (in accordance with World Health
Organization (WHO) recommendations for first-trimester
abortions). In addition, the quality of medical abortions

19 In Appendix Figure A5 similar results, with fewer fluctuations in pre-
periods, are observed when considering trimesterly rather than monthly

cells.
10

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
Table 2
Difference-in-differences estimates of legal reforms on morbidity

Abortion-related morbidity Haemorrhage early in pregnancy
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)

Panel A: ILE versus non-reformers
Post-ILE
Reform (DF)

−0.064*** −0.071*** −0.063*** −0.075*** −0.014*** −0.016*** −0.014XX −0.013**
(0.013) (0.006) (0.016) (0.012) (0.004) (0.004) (0.007) (0.007)
Observations 2496 2496 2496 2496 2496 2496 2496 2496
Mean of
Dependent
Variable

0.338 0.338 0.338 0.338 0.044 0.044 0.044 0.044

Panel B: Regressive reforms versus non-reformers

Post-
Regressive Law

Change

−0.001 0.000 −0.009 −0.007 −0.005 −0.003 −0.005 −0.002
(0.013) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.006) (0.004) (0.006) (0.004)
Observations 5952 5952 5952 5952 5952 5952 5952 5952
Mean of
Dependent
Variable

0.328 0.328 0.328 0.328 0.042 0.042 0.042 0.042

State and
Year × Month
FEs

Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y

Population
Weights

Y Y Y Y

Time-Varying
Controls

Y Y Y Y

Notes: Each column displays a difference-in-differences regression of the impact of abortion reform on rates of morbidity (inpatient cases). Each morbidity
class is measured as cases per 1000 fertile-aged women each month, and average levels in the full set of data are available at the foot of the table. Each
regression is estimated using states that adopt reforms (ILE in Panel A, regressive reforms in Panel B) versus other non-adopting states. All standard errors
are clustered at the level of the state.
XX p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.

Fig. 2a. Event studies for rates of haemorrhage early in pregnancy.

performed has also improved due to the introduction of
mifepristone (combined withmisoprostol)in2011 (Becker,
2013).

We note that these reductions in rates of maternal mor-
bidity in Mexico DF surrounding the passage of the ILE

reform are not simply capturing a general improvement
in health outcomes in the region. In Appendix Figure A6

we estimate identical models for (late-term) obstetric com-
plications and observe no such improvements in Mexico

DF. We also observe evidence to suggest parallel trends
throughout the entire period studied between Mexico DF,
states implementing regressive reforms, and the rest of the
country. Similarly, in Appendix Figures A7 and A8, when
considering a much broader class of morbidity outcomes
11

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

Fig. 2b. Event studies for rates of abortion morbidity. Notes: Event studies document the evolution of rates of haemorrhage early in pregnancy (2a) and
abortion-related morbidity (2b) per 1000 women surrounding the passage of abortion reforms. Each point estimate refers to the change in rates between
treated and untreated states, compared to their baseline differential immediately prior to the reform. The left-hand panel shows the difference between
Mexico DF and untreated states surrounding the passage of the ILE reform. The right-hand panel shows the difference between regressive policy changers
and non-changers around the (time-varying) date that each reform was passed. Regressions are weighted by the population of fertile-aged women, and
the full set of time-varying controls are included.
(such as neoplasms, endocrine diseases and so forth), we
once again observe no systematic difference in rates of

morbidity surrounding abortion reforms, with the excep-
tion of a number of monthly peaks and troughs observed in

Mexico DF, indicative of no general improvements across
the time period studied.
5.1.2. Maternal mortality and “the tip of the iceberg”
Frequently, analyses of the impact of public policies on
maternal health focus on maternal mortality, given a lack
of access to high-quality morbidity records (such as those
available in Mexico). An argument is made that if effects
are observed on maternal morbidity, which is the “tip of

the iceberg” (see Firoz et al., 2013), then there will logi-
cally be considerable impacts on maternal morbidity (the

base ofthe iceberg). However,the much lower frequency of
maternal deaths compared with maternal morbidity makes
it much harder to precisely estimate impacts of health
reforms on maternal mortality. Here we briefly consider
how much precision is lost when considering impacts on
maternal mortality, comparing our previously estimated
impacts on morbidity with those focusing on maternal
deaths. Given the much lower rates of maternal deaths,
we focus on yearly models. And as these estimates are
indeed considerably more noisy than estimated impacts on
morbidity, we relegate results to an Online Appendix and
discuss broad patterns and lessons for estimating reform
impacts on maternal health outcomes.

In Appendix Table A7 we present DD estimates follow-
ing Eqs. (1) (Panel A) and (2) (Panel B) for both all maternal

deaths (columns 1–4), and only maternal deaths originat-
ing from abortive causes (columns 5–8). When focusing on

the ILE reform, we observe mixed evidence pointing in the
direction of negative though imprecisely estimated effects.

Both weighted and unweighted estimates suggest a reduc-
tion in all maternal deaths following ILE (columns 1 and

2), of approximately 0.5 per 100,000 fertile-aged women
(versus a mean value of 4 deaths per 100,000 women in
Mexico). Note, however, that when adding time-varying
controls in column 3, these estimates are reduced by about
one-third and become statistically insignificant at typical

levels. Similarly, in the case of abortion-related mater-
nal mortality, we observe significant reductions when

using weighted or unweighted simple DD models (with
point estimates of around −0.09 per 100,000 fertile-aged

women),though these become insignificant with the inclu-
sion of time-varying controls. In the case of regressive

reforms we find, across the board, relatively less evidence
of any impacts of these reforms on maternal mortality. We

do consistently observe negative point estimates of a mag-
nitude approaching that observed in Mexico DF following

the ILE reform; however, these are only (marginally) sig-
nificant in two models. We also note that, as discussed,

standard errors are quite wide thus precluding us from
concluding that these estimates suggest tightly estimated
zero-impacts.
In general these results point to the fact that focusing
only on mortality when studying reforms which impact

maternal health may considerably understate their impor-
tance as a determinant of well-being. Both Appendix Table

A7 (as well as event studies presented in Appendix Figures
A9a for all maternal mortality and A9b for mortality due to
abortion) suggest noisy results with little power to reject

a range of nulls. While event studies suggest that reduc-
tions in mortality may have been observed in Mexico DF,

these are certainly not as clearly observed as the morbidity
results presented in Section 5.1.1 of this paper.
5.2. Benchmarking impacts on birth rates
While our main focus in this paper is on quantifying
the health costs of abortion reform, it is illustrative to also
12

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

estimate impacts on birth rates. This allows us to con-
sider the magnitude of these reforms compared with a

range of other contexts which have been well-documented
in the economic literature. As summarised in Appendix
Table A8, across studies on abortion legalisation in the
US, Nepal, Norway, Romania and Uruguay, we observe a
drop in birth rates of between 1.2% and 8%. Studies on
the impact of regressive abortion law changes (including
parental consent laws and restricted funding of abortions)
find considerably more heterogeneous results, with results
ranging from significant reductions in birth rates (Kane and
Staiger, 1996), insignificant impacts (Levine et al., 1996),
and increases in rates of birth (Lahey, 2014).
Our results from the Mexican abortion reforms suggest
broadly similar impacts on birth rates to those observed in

other settings following the elimination of abortion restric-
tions. In Table 3 we present DD estimates of the impact of

reforms on birth rates, weighted and unweighted by the
number of fertile-aged women in each state by month cell.
In general, across specifications, results are quite stable in
suggesting a significant reduction in births in Mexico DF
following the ILE reform. Depending onestimation weights,
we observe a reduction of between 0.53 and 0.64 births per

1000 women per month, which is the equivalent of a reduc-
tion of between 7% and 8.5% in birth rates compared with

pre-reform levels in the state. Our preferred estimates are
those including population weights with full time-varying
controls, which suggest a reduction of 0.64 births per 1000
women of fertile age in the years following the ILE reform,
which is the equivalent of an 8.5% reduction in birth rates
in Mexico DF. In the case of states passing regressive laws
altering their penal codes or state constitutions related to

abortion, we find some evidence to suggest smaller reduc-
tions in birth rates in these DD specifications. Depending

on the model, point estimates vary from −0.19 to −0.27
births per 1000 women per month, equivalent to a 2.5% to
3.6% reduction in birth rates.20 We return to examine the
nature of these legal reforms in more detail in Section 5.3,
revisiting the smaller estimated impacts on birth rates.

We provide full event studies corresponding to the pas-
sage of progressive and regressive reforms in Fig. 3a. Given

the considerable seasonality and even monthly variations
in the quantity of births, we additionally present event
studies by year in Fig. 3b (and by trimester in Appendix
Figure A10), which allows for some smoothing of sharp
monthly changes. In the left-hand panel of both monthly
and yearly event studies, we observe a reduction in birth
rates in Mexico DF when compared with all non-reform
states, which becomes consistently observed from around
7–10 months (or one year) post-reform (2008) onwards.

20 As we will discuss below, we note that these estimates are significant
only in the case of two-way FE models and not in event study models. In

general, inthe case ofthe regressive reforms whichare rolled outina time-
varying way,two-way FE models potentially mis-estimate the true nature

of the ATT, and so we find event study estimates more credible. Nonethe-
less, we do note that in some literature discussed in Appendix Table A8

reductions in fertility are observed following legal restrictions on abortion
access, and this could potentially be explained if increasing sanctions on
abortion act to discourage marginal births. A theoretical model of such a
case is provided in Ananat et al. (2009).

This is in line with lags in birth rates expected to be

observed approximately 7–9 months following the pas-
sage of abortion reforms due to the gestational period and

limits on gestational length when undertaking abortion.
Estimates in the pre-reform period are not completely flat.

If anything they suggest evidence of a slightly upward-
sloping trend or an inverted U-shaped trend a number

of years before the adoption of abortion law reforms in
Mexico DF.
The impact of prevailing trends in outcomes which are
not parallel between treated and untreated areas can be
formally examined using “Honest DD” methods proposed
by Rambachan and Roth (2019). These methods propose a
robust estimation and inference technique assuming that
trends in the post-event period do not diverge ‘too much’
from those in the pre-event period.21 We document how
our estimated event study coefficients would vary under a
range of assumptions using these “Honest DD” techniques
in Appendix Figures A11, A12 and A13. Given that these
techniques require bounding each figure in the event study,
we conduct these methods with yearly analogues of the
monthly event studies (confidence intervals for baseline
yearly event studies are presented in blue in these plots for
comparison). Importantly, as well as allowing for varying
violations of parallel trends, they document that in each
case, if trends had remained constant in the post-event
period, the true estimate would be both more negative and
consistently statistically significant. In Appendix C we also
document the stability of these estimates when compared
to a judiciously chosen synthetic control group (Figure
A26).
The right-hand panel of Fig. 3a documents the same

point estimates and confidence intervals for states alter-
ing their constitutions or criminal codes to increase legal

sanctions on abortion. In the case of regressive reforms,

while we observe a gradual reduction in estimated coef-
ficients following legal changes, the effects are generally

not statistically distinguishable from zero in monthly (or
trimesterly) event study models, although a significant
impact is observed 4–5 years post-treatment in more
aggregated yearly models. In this case, prevailing trends
in the pre-reform period are observed to be somewhat
downward sloping, with little evidence of a trend break
following the implementation of regressive reforms. These
event studies suggest that, if anything, the DD estimates
presented in Fig. 3a may over-state the impact of legislative

tightenings. Given recent advances in work on the interpre-
tation of two-way FE models, it is important to note that in

the case of regressive abortionlaws whichare rolledoutina
time-varying way,these event study models which suggest
insignificant effects (in monthly and trimesterly models

21 Specifically, these methods are not based on parallel trends assump-
tions but rather impose a limit on the degree to which parallel trends can

fail in the post-treatment period. Following Rambachan and Roth (2019),

in the tests conducted in this paper we limit the degree to which counter-
factual trends between outcomes in the ILE and non-ILE areas are allowed

to deviate from linearity. We present bounds estimates based on various
different assumptions related to the maximum possible divergences from
linearity between each time period, allowing us to observe the sensitivity
of inference to possible failures of parallel trend assumptions.
13

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
Table 3
Monthly difference-in-differences estimates of abortion reforms on fertility.
Births per 1000 women
(1) (2) (3) (4)

Panel A: ILE versus non-reformers
Post-ILE Reform (DF) −0.531*** −0.636*** −0.537*** −0.608***
(0.075) (0.106) (0.110) (0.106)
Observations 2028 2028 2028 2028
Mean of Dependent Variable 7.302 7.302 7.302 7.302
Mean of Dependent Variable (Mexico DF) 7.433 7.433 7.433 7.433
Panel B: Regressive reforms versus non-reformers
Post Regressive Law Change −0.191** −0.269*** −0.202** −0.228**
(0.089) (0.097) (0.085) (0.112)
Observations 4836 4836 4836 4836
Mean of Dependent Variable 7.266 7.266 7.266 7.266
Mean of Dependent Variable (Regressive States) 7.434 7.434 7.434 7.434
State and Year FEs Y Y Y Y
Population Weights Y Y
Time-Varying Controls Y Y
Each column displays a difference-in-differences regression of the impact of abortion reform on birth rates. Birth rates are measured as the number of
births per 1000 fertile-aged women each month. Time-varying controls are documented in Section B.2. All standard errors are clustered at the level of the
state using a wild clustered bootstrap procedure.
** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.

Fig. 3a. Monthly event studies for birth rates.

documented in Appendix Figure A10) should be preferred
over the models presented in Table 3. This is because the

weighting in the two-way FE models may result in esti-
mates which do not truly capture the ATE. We return to

this point in the next sub-section.
5.3. Understanding impacts of abortions laws
5.3.1. Why do we observe changes in women’s health?

In Section 2.4 we discussed three conceptual chan-
nels through which abortion reform could impact maternal

health: the “quality of care” channel, the “demand” chan-
nel, and the “selection” channel. We consider which of

these channels could explain the observed impacts of abor-
tion reform on women’s health laid out in Section 5.1.

The selection channel suggests that the composition
of women giving birth may change because of selective
interaction with abortion laws. We consider this directly in

Appendix Table A9 where we use the same two-way FE set-
up to examine how maternal and paternal characteristics

vary surrounding both the ILE reform as well as regressive
reforms. In general, we observe that parents who give birth
following the ILE reform are both older and more educated.

We also see some change in the composition of parents fol-
lowing regressive reforms with parents more likely to be

married, which potentially indicates that there are impacts

on the types of women conceiving when sanctions on abor-
tions are raised. While this suggests that a selection channel

may be occurring, these results do not allow us to sign
the direction this channel works in, as they do not directly
consider the interaction of these changing characteristics
14

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

Fig. 3b. Yearly event studies for birth rates. Notes: Event studies documentthe evolution of birth rates per 1000 women surrounding the passage of abortion
reforms. Each point estimate refers to the change in rates between treated and untreated states, compared to their baseline differential immediately prior
to the reform. Fig. 3a presents event studies based on monthly birth rates while Fig. 3b is based on yearly birth rates (trimesterly figures are displayed in
Appendix Figure A10). In each case, the left-hand panel shows the difference between Mexico DF and untreated states surrounding the passage of the ILE
reform. The right-hand panel shows the difference between regressive policy changers and non-changers around the (time-varying) date that each reform
was passed. Regressions are weighted by the population of fertile-aged women, and the full set of time-varying controls are included.
on health outcomes. We test this directly in Appendix
Table A10 where we consider the same two-way FE models
examining reform impacts on health outcomes; however,
in this instance additionally controlling for variables which

capture parental selection (namely, all outcomes consid-
ered in Appendix Table A9). This allows us to ask whether

the estimates of the impact of abortion reforms on health
that we observe are completely explained by the changes
in the composition of parents.

The results of Table A10 suggest a number of impor-
tant interpretations. First, in the case of abortion-related

morbidity, many of the observed impacts of the ILE reform
do appear to flow from changes in the characteristics

of parents. And, in particular, the fact that our signifi-
cant estimates are attenuated towards zero conditional on

these controls suggests that those giving birth following
the reform are selectively healthier (at least in terms of
the likelihood of having a miscarriage or other types of

abortion-related morbidity). However, in the case of haem-
orrhage early in pregnancy, we observe no such change in

the coefficients. This suggests that the observed impacts
are not simply a compositional impact but rather likely

owe to the demand channel or the quality of care chan-
nel. In the case of Mexico, it seems likely that the quality

of care channel explains the large reduction in haemor-
rhage in early pregnancy. In clandestine settings, where

misoprostol is used without adequate access to informa-
tion, haemorrhage and resulting hospitalisation is likely

to occur, something which can be avoided when care is
sought through ILE providers who give both treatment as
well as information related to post-abortion care. However,
without data on the usage of clandestine abortion prior to
the ILE reform it is difficult to assess the degree to which
legalising abortion may have resulted in the avoidance of

marginal births. Thus, in principle, while the evidence sug-
gests that the observed impacts of legalised abortion on

rates of haemorrhage early in pregnancy do not owe to the

selection channel, and while it seems likely that the qual-
ity of care channel is a main determinant, without data

on clandestine abortion we cannot formally rule out the
demand channel.22
5.3.2. De jure versus de facto legal reforms
In general we find no impact of regressive law changes
on resulting morbidity and small impacts on birth rates.
One potential explanation for this is that, although de
jure changes were made to state constitutions, the de
facto implementation of laws and penal codes remained
unchanged. As we document in Appendix Table A1, in
many cases, while constitutions were altered—generally
to declare that human life begins at conception—this did

not always translate in concrete legal changes in the crim-
inal sanctions imposed on women. This has been similarly

noted in legal analyses of the reform (Singh et al., 2012).
And even in cases where criminal sanctions were increased,
it may be the case that state-level judiciaries do not alter
the likelihood of imposing sanctions on abortion.
We examine whether there is evidence of changes in

the likelihood of being sentenced to prison for under-
taking an abortion or in the length of prison sentences

received, based on the passage of the abortion laws exam-
ined in this paper. These data cover all individuals in the

country, and here our outcomes are focused explicitly on

whether an individual is sentenced to prison for under-
taking an abortion. DD results following specifications (1)

and (2) are displayed in Table 4. We observe, first, that
22 Given the expansion of the medical abortion regime (i.e., the use of

misoprostol and mifepristone) in Mexico DF (Becker, 2013), complica-
tions due to the abortion procedures themselves following the ILE reform

appear to be low (Grimes et al., 2006). It is therefore unlikely that channel
2b, from Section 2.4, explains large movements in maternal health.
15

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
Table 4
Difference-in-differences estimates of abortion reforms on judicial outcomes.

Number of prison sentences Length of prison sentences
(1) (2) (3) (4)

Panel A: ILE versus non-reformers
Post-ILE Reform (DF) −4.018*** −4.050*** 2.251** 2.150**
(0.294) (0.340) (1.032) (1.063)
Observations 117 117 56 56
Mean of Dependent Variable 1.427 1.427 3.606 3.606
Panel B: Regressive reforms versus non-reformers
Post-Regressive Law Change −0.648 −1.362** 4.144XX 5.220**
(0.464) (0.607) (2.361) (2.439)
Observations 279 279 171 171
Mean of Dependent Variable 1.806 1.806 3.749 3.749
State and Year FEs Y Y Y Y
Population Weights Y Y
Difference-in-difference models illustrate how abortion reforms correlate with prison sentences handed down by the judiciary and the length of these
prison sentences in years. The total number of sentences and the average length of prison sentences are generated from administrative records captured
in Mexico’s Judicial Statistics on Penal Matters. This is the universe of judiciary decisions in the country based on the first legal judgment and so does not
include any subsequent appeals. Analysis of the length of prison sentences presented in columns 3 and 4 is conditional on any prison sentences being
handed down in each state and year. Prison sentence lengths are calculated from a categorical variable capturing bins of between six months and two years,
and in each case we record the total years (or fractions of years) based on the midpoint of each bin. Bins are consistently used in the period displayed here.
All standard errors are clustered at the level of the state and calculated using a wild bootstrap procedure. Identical models using population-standardised
values for dependent variables are presented in Appendix Table A11.
XX p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.

there is a sharp reduction in the number of prison sen-
tences for undertaking an abortion in Mexico DF following

the reform (in line with the legalisation of abortion); how-
ever, this was observed alongside an estimated increase in

sentence lengths.23 Importantly, we observe evidence of

a dual impact in regressive states. We observe mixed evi-
dence pointing to a slight reduction in the number of prison

sentences handed down, falling by 1.36 cases in weighted
regressions (compared with a mean number of sentences

per state and year of 1.806). In the case of the length of sen-
tences, we observe a considerable increase of between 4.1

and 5.2 years, depending on the specification estimated.

In the case of weighted estimates, we observe an aver-
age increase of 5.2 years, which is considerable, even at

the lower end of the 95% confidence interval, when com-
pared with themean sentence length of 3.7 years.While the

increase in the length of sentences is in line with harsher

sanctions, the observed reduction in the number of crim-
inal sanctions is surprising. There are, however, a number

of potential explanations which could be offered such as
prosecutors focusing on more serious crimes or reduced
rates of sentencing if women temporarily leave their state

to access abortion in other states with less stringent sen-
tencing practices. Thus, these results suggest that while

23 Note thatin Mexico DF, while abortion was legalised by the ILE reform
it was only the case for abortions realisedupto12 weeks of gestation. Thus,
in theory, custodial sentences can still be handed down for abortion when
not meeting this condition. In practice, a non-zero number of sentences
was only observed in Mexico DF in 2011 (refer to Appendix Figure A14 for
trends over time). In particular, the significant increase in the length of
custodial sentences is observed as very few cases were prosecuted, with
prosecuted cases likely being relatively serious offences outside the scope
of the ILE reform.

the changes in law did not necessarily always prescribe a
change in prison sentences, there is a detectable increase

in the length of prison sentences observed in administra-
tive data, conditional on being sentenced to prison. This

increase in average sentence length is observed to hold
in event study analysis, with significant impacts observed
fromone year post-reformonwards (Appendix FigureA15).
5.3.3. Considering the universe of health records
Considering the universe of the public health system.
In principal models, we have used month × year × state
measures of outcomes, given that as documented in Table

A2, a wave of legal restrictions were put in place in vary-
ing months of 2008 and 2009. However, as discussed in

the Data Section of this document, only hospitals admin-
istered by Mexico’s Secretariat of Health (available to all

individuals) report month of hospitalisation in administra-
tive data. In order to determine whether a similar pattern

is observed across the entire public health system, we
additionally conduct analysis pooling by hospitalisations in
hospitals administered by the Secretariat of Health, as well
as those administered by social security providers. In this
case, given the lack of monthly records in social security
hospitals, we can only estimate models by year. In Fig. 4
we present yearly event studies for the main morbidity
outcomes considered, extending to this full sample.
In all cases, we observe broadly similar results in each
case. In the case of haemorrhage morbidity, we observe

a sharp fall of around 1 per 1000 cases per year immedi-
ately following the reform in Mexico DF (Panel(a)), with no

similar results observed in states undertaking reform tight-
enings (Panel(b)). Similarly, reductions in abortion-related

morbidity are observed in Mexico DF, appearing gradually
16

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

Fig. 4. Yearly event studies based on all public data. Notes: Event studies replicate those from Figs. 2a and 2b ; however, using yearly administrative records
based on Secretariat of Health hospitals and social security hospitals. All details follow those indicated in notes to Figs. 2a and 2b ; however, we now work
with the universe of hospital visits in all public hospitals. DD models are provided in Appendix Table A12 (and Appendix Table A13 for birth rates).
over time as observed in monthly event studies with no
similar changes observed in regressive states (panels (c)
and (d)).
Leakage to the private health system. One potential
alternative explanationofthe observedmorbidity results in
all public hospitals is that, rather than being driven entirely
by the abortion reform,they may reflect changes in usage of
the health system, with a larger number of women opting

to use the private healthcare system. This argument can-
not explain the impact on fertility and maternal mortality

as these outcomes are based on the complete records of
births and deaths in the country. However, it could partially

explain the impacts observed on morbidity as our admin-
istrative data records inpatient stays in the public health

system (refer to Section 3 for additional discussion).
While we cannot consistently merge public and private
health data at the most disaggregated level of morbidity

causes, we are able to consider all causes of abortion-
related morbidity in the private healthcare system.24 In

Appendix FigureA16 we plot rates of abortion-related mor-
bidity in the universe of private hospitals (left-hand panel)

and the universe of public hospitals (right-hand panel).
These descriptive plots suggest that, if anything, results
in the private system will only strengthen our estimates,
as we observe a sharper reduction in abortion-related

morbidity in private hospitals than we observe in pub-
lic hospitals. In the case of morbidity due to haemorrhage

early in pregnancy, we are unable to observe this as a sole
cause in the private health records, but we are able to
observe the class in which this cause falls and again we

observe a considerably sharper reduction in morbidity fol-
24 Note that as documented in Appendix Table A3,this mapping captures

all ICD-10 codes O00–O08, while typically abortion-related morbidity is
calculated from codes O02–O08. In Figure A16 we plot comparisons using
precisely the same aggregated codes in public and private hospitals.
17

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
lowing the reform in the private health system than we
observe in the public health system (Appendix Figure A17).
5.3.4. Reform spillovers and heterogeneity
Reform spillovers. As outlined in Section 2.2, the ILE
reform was not strictly limited to residents of Mexico

DF. Recent evidence from the US documents a willing-
ness to travel a significant distance to access abortion

providers (Lindo et al., 2019; Venator and Fletcher, 2019).
In Appendix Table A14 we provide summary figures of the
state of precedence of users of abortion services in Mexico
DF based on administrative data for 2007–2015. While
the majority of users (72.5%) are women from Mexico
DF, women residing all throughout Mexico have access
to ILE. The largest non-DF population comes from nearby
Mexico State (24.2%). In general, users of the ILE reform
are clustered in states geographically close to Mexico DF. A

descriptive plot is presented in Appendix Figure A18. Resi-
dents in Mexico DF have by far the highest rate of abortion,

at 5.8 abortions per 1000 women aged 15–49, followed by
Mexico State, at 1 per 1000, and then two nearby states of
Hidalgo and Morelos, with rates of 0.1 per 1000. Remaining

states have rates which are an additional order of magni-
tude lower than this.

Despite some evidence of very localised geographic
spillovers, we do not observe clear evidence of changes in
birth or maternal health outcomes in nearby states. In Table
A15 we estimate DD models augmenting specification (1)
with a post ILE × spillover state indicator, where spillover
states refer to Mexico State, Morelos and Hidalgo (the three

states with most considerable abortion usage per popu-
lation). In no case do we observe statistically significant

reductions in fertility, morbidity, or mortality; if anything,
we observe weakly positive impacts. Additional discussion
is provided in Appendix C.
An alternative model which captures both the impacts
of the reform in Mexico DF as well as any reform spillovers
to the rest of the country replaces the ILE variable in Eq. (1)

with the intensity of treatment in each state. This inten-
sity measure is captured as the rate of abortion per 1000

women via the ILE program (documented in Appendix
Table A14) in the post-reform period in each state.25 This
information is reported in official ILE reports, but it is
only available at the level of the year, and as such in this

case we estimate yearly models as in Section 5.3.3. If out-
comes per 1000 women are regressed on abortion usage

per 1000 women, we are provided with a back-of-the-
envelope calculation of the elasticity of outcomes with

respect to the availability of a legal abortion. For example,
if each additional legal abortion results in 1 fewer birth,

we will estimate a coefficient of −1 in this model, suggest-
ing full pass-through of legalised abortion to birth rates.

We note, however, in our case that the figures on abor-
tions refer only to those abortions provided by official ILE

providers. To the degree that private providers additionally
25 We thus capture rates of abortion using the ILE program in Mexico DF
among residents of all states in the country. Non-residents of Mexico DF
are able to access abortion through the ILE program without restrictions
provided that they travel to an ILE clinic in Mexico DF.

provide access to legal abortion, these estimates should be
seen as an upper bound estimate on the magnitude of pass
through.We estimatemodels ofthis type inAppendix Table

A16. In general we observe that, using the full data on abor-
tions across Mexico resulting from the ILE reform, impacts

per abortionare considerable suggesting approximately 0.9
fewer births per every abortion provided, 0.16 fewer cases

of abortion-related morbidity, and 0.14 fewer cases of mor-
bidity due to haemorrhage in early pregnancy. These values

must be viewed in line with the caveat above that any abor-
tions accessed from private providers will reduce the actual

magnitude of pass-through (likely to be considerable given
the relevance of the private sector), and as such these are
upper bound estimates.
Individual heterogeneity in reform impacts. Effects
discussed up to this point have focused on average
outcomes over all women aged 15–49. However, given

evidence documenting heterogeneous impacts of abor-
tion reform in other contexts (Ananat et al., 2007), and

heterogeneity in access to abortion in Mexico (Friedman
et al., 2019), we consider heterogeneity in a number of
measures here. In Tables A17 and A18 we examine the
impacts of the reform on abortion-related morbidity and
on haemorrhage early in pregnancy by quinquennial age
groups and by an individual’s insurance coverage. While
we would like to consider impacts by individual income
level, the category of insurance coverage is one of the

closest proxies of income which we can observe in hos-
pitalisation microdata.26 In the case of both outcomes we

observe three broad stylised facts. First, health impacts are
observed across the age distribution; second,these impacts
are largest in size among younger women, peaking in the
20–24 age group; and,third,that results appear to be driven
by individuals who do have insurance coverage. This final

fact suggests that impacts may be larger among higher-
income women; however, it is important to note that this

classification by insurance status is very crude because not

having formal insurance likely signifies a considerable dis-
connection from the public health system.

Finally, in Appendix Figure A19 we document impacts
more finely by age, specifically focusing on teenaged and

younger women. Given that minors require parental con-
sent, we may expect that impacts on these women are

26 Microdata on patients treated at state-run hospitals, in particular,
records whether they have insurance coverage through any social security

providers (such as the Mexican Social Security Institute), state govern-
ments, private providers, or alternatively no insurance through these

channels. In all years, at least 15% of patients in public hospitals are
recorded as having no insurance. This proportion did not change sharply
around the passage of the ILE reform or subsequent regressive reforms

(and access to ILE is free for residents of Mexico DF regardless of indi-
vidual insurance status). It is important to note that all hospitalisation

records we observe depend on individuals actually presenting at hospi-
tals. Thus, to the degree that lack of insurance coverage acts to dissuade

individuals from seeking care, this will result in under-estimates of the
true magnitude of complications. However, in the absence of access to

formal insurance, such incentives are likely similar in both pre- and post-
reform periods, and as such we do not expect insurance cover categories

to directly interact with the reform coefficients estimated here. Nonethe-
less, as insurance coverage depends on a broad range of both observable

and unobservable characteristics, we treat this heterogeneity analysis as
broadly descriptive, and only a rough proxy for income.
18

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

Fig. 5. Goodman-Bacon (2018) Decomposition based on 2 × 2 difference-in-difference models. Notes: Figures document the Goodman-Bacon decompo-
sition into a series of 2 × 2 difference-in-differences models depending on the type of comparison unit. Here the ‘treatment’ refers to the passage of a

regressive abortion law, and the outcomes refer to rates of morbidity per 1000 women. The passage of the ILE reform occurred at a single moment in time
and, as such, decompositions need not be performed. The global decomposition is given in Table A19.
reduced, in line with reduced rates of usage. In Appendix
Figure A19 we observe single-coefficient DD estimates for
each age, where we estimate models (1) (presented as

hollow circles) and (2) (presented as black squares) sepa-
rately in each yearly age group. Here, while we do observe

a general increase in the magnitude of coefficients when
increasing from women aged 15–18 and above, we do
observe that even among younger adolescents (e.g., 16-
year-olds), significant impacts of ILE are observed on both
rates of haemorrhage and abortion-related morbidity.

Temporal heterogeneity in reform impacts. An addi-
tional concern related to the timing of adoption of the

regressive reforms is that single-coefficient DD estimates
(Eq. (1)) may be capturing heterogeneity and variation in

law implementation rather than the ATT itself (Goodman-
Bacon, 2018). We may be concerned that small effects, in

particular, are being driven by the incorrect use of already
treated units as controls in future periods. This will bias
towards zero any effects of the laws if these impacts are
growing over time.We thus follow Goodman-Bacon (2018)
in explicitly decomposing the single-coefficient DD model

into its component parts of a pure “treated versus never-
treated” effect, and effects owing simply to the variation in

timing ofthe passage oflaws.27 We note thatthis decompo-
sition is only of concern in the case of regressive laws given

that ILE was adopted in a single moment of time (and a sin-
gle state). This decomposition is displayed graphically in

27 Goodman-Bacon (2018) notes that a single-coefficient DD estimate

is a weighted combination of each possible pair-wise DD estimate com-
paring treated states with (a) non-treated states, (b) states which are not

yet treated but are treated later, and (c) states which do not change their
treatment status in a given period but that have been previously treated.
In the case of time-varying treatment effects, this third comparison can
potentially lead to mis-signed treatment effects. The decomposition we
conduct here consists of plotting the individual DD estimate from each
possible state-by-state comparison, as well as the weight it is given in the
global single-coefficient DD estimate resulting from Eq. (1).

Fig. 5 following Goodman-Bacon (2018), Goodman-Bacon
et al. (2019). We plot the full set of “2 × 2” DD estimates of
the impact of regressive reforms on morbidity outcomes,28
where these models come from all variation in treatment
timing and all possible control groups. We observe that
estimates are largely clustered around zero, particularly

for the Treated versus Never-Treated comparisons of inter-
est. We present the global decomposition in Appendix

Table A19, and observe—reassuringly—thatin each case the
majority of the weight in the single coefficient DD estimate
comes from the Treated versus Never-Treated comparison
(around 92%) and, in general, estimates even within the
timing-only groups are similarly small when compared to
the Treated versus Never-Treated effect.
5.3.5. Broader impacts of the ILE reform

The ILE reform was a significant change, and was note-
worthy across Latin America (Sánchez Fuentes et al., 2008).

Evidence from literature in economics, such as Chiappori

and Oreffice (2008), Oreffice (2007), suggests that abor-
tion reform can have significantimpacts beyond health and

fertility outcomes, extending to broader spheres within

households and individual well-being. Here we briefly dis-
cuss a number of possible additional impacts of abortion

reform on women’s mental health and family outcomes.
Given challenges in measurement and reporting,29 this
28 Estimates for birth rates are provided in Appendix Figure A20. 29 When screened for, as well as other mental health issues related

to childbirth, maternal depression is a common condition both antena-
tal and post-partum with estimates suggesting a prevalence of between

13–18% in Mexico (Albuja et al., 2017). However, as in most countries,
the prevalence of maternal depression is difficult to establish as maternal

depression is often under-diagnosed and under-reported (by both health-
care professionals as well as patients) (Anokye et al., 2018). Our ability to

capture post-partum depression (and similar conditions) is limited given
that we do not have access to outpatient or pharmaceutical data. Being
hospitalised for post-partum depression is rare and hospitalisations are
19

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

Fig. 6a. Monthly event studies examining post-partum depression.

work should be considered as exploratory and a possible
subject of future research.
To examine the impact on maternal mental health,
we consider the predominant mental disorders in this
domain, namely post-partum depression and other mental
and behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium
(World Health Organization, 2015). We use the same

administrative health records as used previously record-
ing all hospitalisations classified as owing to mental and

behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium,
including post-partum depression (ICD-10 code F53).30
In Fig. 6a and 6b we estimate impacts of abortion
reform following Eqs. (1) and (2) on rates of post-partum

depression. While Fig. 6a suggests no consistently observ-
able impacts on rates of post-partum depression around

the passage of abortion reforms (for both progressive and
regressive reforms), there is some evidence suggesting a
reduction in rates of depression in Mexico DF compared

with other untreated states when examining yearly esti-
mates in Fig. 6b. No such clear evidence is observed in the

case of states undertaking legal tightenings.
Finally, while in this paper we are focusing principally
on the health impacts of the adoption of abortion laws,
there are potentially much broader impacts of such policy.

For example, Lauletta (2019) provides evidence of poten-
tial reductions in domestic violence flowing from these

reforms, in line with economic theory suggesting improve-
ments in women’s bargaining power flowing from birth

control reforms.
5.3.6. Mechanisms: availability, education, or behaviour
Along with the law change legalising abortions, the ILE
reform included additional components relating to sexual
education and disbursement of additional contraceptives
in clinics (refer to Section 2.2). To examine the channels
likely to capture the most serve cases of mental illness while the majority
of women are most likely treated elsewhere if diagnosed. 30 Another relevant mental health outcome is suicide attempt. However,
this is an extreme measure of poor mental health. Moreover, in the ICD
system suicide attempts are recorded separately as external causes, which
are not consistently available in all microdata over time.

through which the reform affected birth rates: whether it
be only access or a combination of access with behavioural
change, we use the MxFLS data which follows women over

time and has survey rounds both before and after the abor-
tion reforms of interest. To examine the potential effect of

the other aspects of the reform (sexual education and con-
traceptives), we estimate a version of Eq. (1) at the level of

the individual, which allows for individual-specific fixed-
effects given the panel nature of the MxFLS data.

We examine the effect of abortion reform on all

available measures of contraceptive use (using any con-
traceptive or using modern contraceptives), the number

of reported sexual partners, and whether the respondent

reports having knowledge of modern contraceptive meth-
ods. These results are presented in Appendix Table A20.

In general, we find very little evidence to suggest that the
results of the abortion reform flow from an increase in
other contraceptive knowledge in reform areas or change
in risky sexual behaviour as a result of the reform. We

find quite close to zero effects for change in contracep-
tive use and knowledge, and an insignificant reduction in

the number of sexual partners reported. In all cases, these
results are insignificant at the 10% level31 suggesting that
the ILE reform’s effectis largely due to the sharp increase in

utilisation of abortion services rather than alternative con-
traception or information channels. Similarly, we do not

find that regressive changes in abortion laws cause women

to seek additional information,to be more likely to use con-
traceptives, or to change sexual behaviour as proxied by

the number of sexual partners compared to areas which
were not subject to a regressive reform. We do note in the
case of the number of sexual partners that while we cannot
reject that the impact is significant even at a 10% level, we
cannot rule out economically meaningful effects given the
reasonably inexact point estimate.

31 Summary statistics are provided in Appendix Table A21, and similar
results are observed using a repeated cross section of women (Appendix
Table A22).
20

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413

Fig. 6b. Yearly event studies examining post-partum depression. Notes: Event studies document the evolution of rates of post-partum depression per 1000
women surrounding the passage of abortion reforms. Each point estimate refers to the change in rates between treated and non-treated states, compared
to their baseline differential immediately prior to the reform. Fig. 6a presents event studies based on monthly rates of post-partum depression (using data
from Secretary of Health hospitals only), while Fig. 6b presents event studies based on yearly rates of post-partum depression using data from all public
hospitals (both Secretary of Health and social security providers). In each case, the left-hand panel shows the difference between Mexico DF and untreated
states surrounding the passage of the ILE reform. The right-hand panel shows the difference between regressive policy changers and non-changers around
the (time-varying) date that each reform was passed. Regressions are weighted by the population of fertile-aged women, and the full set of time-varying
controls are included.
6. Conclusion
In this paper we examine the impact of abortion law on

women’s health. We consider a context in which consid-
erable heterogeneity in legislative reform is observed. In

Mexico in the late 2000s both a substantial loosening and a
series of tightenings of abortion policies were undertaken

at the sub-national level. Using comprehensive vital statis-
tics data on maternal health outcomes, we observe that safe

legal abortion available in the first trimester of pregnancy

in Mexico DF resulted in a sharp drop in maternal morbid-
ity due to haemorrhage in early pregnancy and a slower

decline in abortion-related morbidity, perhaps in line with
the gradual adoption of recommended abortion techniques
by public health clinics. These declines were of substantial
importance suggesting 8600 fewer inpatient visits in the
post-abortion years in Mexico DF. In general, we observe
quite weak effects of the tightening of de facto sanctions
on abortion, even though, as we show, these sanctions did
lead to changes in the length of sentences handed down to
women.
We document that the impact of Mexico DF’s ILE reform
on birth rates, at around an 8% reduction, is in line with
impacts estimated in other settings (e.g., the US in the
1970s). We observe generally weaker effects of regressive
reforms on birth rates, although we note that in the case of
Mexico these state-level reforms may have reduced fertility
by around 1–2%. When examining the impacts of abortion

reforms on rates of maternal death, our estimates are con-
siderably noisier than those for maternal morbidity. This

is important given that a range of papers examining the
impact of abortion on women’s health limit analyses to
maternal death because of a paucity of high-quality health
records. Our results suggest that this focus on “the tip of
the iceberg” may lead to less convincing results than when

focusing on maternal morbidity. While focusing on sur-
viving child birth should be an absolute minimum when

designing public policies to protect maternal and women’s
health, maternal morbidity is of considerable importance

when quantifying lifetime well-being and avoiding a con-
siderable health burden leading to chronic conditions.

The results of this paper are becoming relevant once
again as a number of countries revisit abortion legislation

and attempt to make considerable changes to constitu-
tions and penal codes. Among others, legislative reforms

have been undertaken or attempted in Ireland, Argentina,
Australia, Chile and New Zealand between 2017–2020
focusing on legalising abortion in certain circumstances,
and increasing restrictions have been enacted or proposed
in Poland and a number of US states. This paper documents
that these policies are likely to have a considerable impact
on women’s health and well-being.
Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this arti-
cle can be found, in the online version, at

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2020.102413.
References
Albuja, A.F., Lara, M.A., Navarrete, L., Nieto, L., 2017. Social support and
postpartum depression revisited: the traditional female role as
moderator among Mexican women. Sex Roles 77, 209–220.
Ananat, E.O., Gruber, J., Levine, P., 2007. Abortion legalization and
life-cycle fertility. J. Hum. Resour. XLII, 375–397.
Ananat, E.O., Gruber, J., Levine, P.B., Staiger, D., 2009. Abortion and
selection. Rev. Econ. Stat. 91, 124–136.
Anokye, R., Acheampong, E., Budu-Ainooson, A., Obeng, E.I., Akwasi, A.G.,
2018. Prevalence of postpartum depression and interventions
utilized for its management. Ann. Gen. Psychiatry 17, 18.
Bailey, M.J., Lindo, J.M., 2017. Access and Use of Contraception and Its
Effects on Women’s Outcomes in the US. National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers 23465.
21

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
Becker, D., 2013. Decriminalization of abortion in Mexico city: the effects
on women’s reproductive rights. Am. J. Public Health 103,
590–593.
Becker, D., Olavarrieta, C.D., Garcia, S.G., Harper, C.C., 2013. Women’s
reports on postabortion family-planning services provided by the
public-sector legal abortion program in Mexico city. Int. J. Gynecol.
Obstet. 121, 149–153.
Benson, J., Andersen, K., Samandari, G., 2011. Reductions in
abortion-related mortality following policy reform: evidence from
Romania, South Africa and Bangladesh. Reprod. Health 8, 39.
Bitler, M., Zavodny, M., 2001. The effect of abortion restrictions on the
timing of abortions. J. Health Econ. 20, 1011–1032.
Blanco-Mancilla, G., 2011. Implementation of Health Policies in Mexico
City: What Factors Contribute to More Effective Service Delivery?
The London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), Ph.D.
Thesis.
Bongaarts, J., 2016. WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group, and
United Nations Population Division Trends in Maternal Mortality:
1990 to 2015 Geneva: World Health Organization, 2015. Popul. Dev.
Rev. 42, 726.
Chiappori, P.-A., Oreffice, S., 2008. Birth control and female
empowerment: an equilibrium analysis. J. Polit. Econ. 116, 113–140.
Chowdhury, M.E., Botlero, R., Koblinsky, M., Saha, S.K., Dieltiens, G.,
Ronsmans, C., 2007. Determinants of reduction in maternal mortality
in Matlab, Bangladesh: a 30-year cohort study. Lancet 370,
1320–1328.
Ciudad de México, 2007. Gaceta Oficial del Distrito Federal, Gaceta
Oficial, No 70, Órgano del Gobierno del Distrito Federal,
http://www.inmujeres.df.gob.mx/wb/inmujeres/decreto por
el que se reforma el codigo penal para (accessed 26.04.07)
(consulted 26.04.16) http://web.archive.org/web/20150924024041/.
Clarke, D., Mühlrad, H., 2018. Abortion Laws and Women’s Health.
Institute of Labor Economics (IZA), IZA Discussion Papers 11890.
Clarke, D., Tapia Schythe, K., 2020. Implementing the Panel Event Study.
Institute of Labor Economics (IZA), IZA Discussion Papers
13524.
Contreras, X., van Dijk, M.G., Sanchez, T., Smith, P.S., 2011. Experiences
and opinions of health-care professionals regarding legal abortion in
Mexico city: a qualitative study. Stud. Family Plan. 42, 183–190.
Darney, B.G., Saavedra-Avendano, B., Lozano, R., 2017. Maintaining rigor
in research: flaws in a recent study and a reanalysis of the
relationship between state abortion laws and maternal mortality in
Mexico. Contraception 95, 105–111.
Firoz, T., Chou, D., von Dadelszen, P., Agrawal, P., Vanderkruik, R.,
Tunc ̧ alp, O., Laura, N.v., Magee, A., Say, L., 2013. Measuring maternal
health: focus on maternal morbidity. Bull. World Health Organ. 91,
794–796.
Fischer, S., Royer, H., White, C., 2018. The impacts of reduced access to
abortion and family planning services on abortions, births, and
contraceptive purchases. J. Public Econ. 167, 43–68.
Fraser, B., 2015. Tide begins to turn on abortion access in South America.
Lancet 383, 2113–2114.
Freyaldenhoven, S., Hansen, C., Shapiro, J.M., 2018. Pre-event Trends in
the Panel Event-study Design. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper 24565.
Friedman, J., Saavedra-Avendano,  ̃ B., Schiavon, R., Alexander, L.,
Sanhueza, P., Rios-Polanco, R., Garcia-Martinez, L., Darney, B.G.,
2019. Quantifying disparities in access to public-sector abortion
based on legislative differences within the Mexico City metropolitan
area. Contraception 99, 160–164.
Gamboa Montejano, C., Valdés Robledo, S., 2014. Regulación del Aborto
en México: Derecho Comparado de los 31 estados y del Distrito
Federal, así como de diversos países en el mundo y estadísticas del
INEGI en el tema, SAPI-ISS 33-14. Subdirección de Análisis de Política
Interior.
Gobierno de Nayarit, 2009. Exposición de Motivos; Reformo y Adición al
Artículo 7, Fracción XI, de la Constitución Política del Estado Libre y
Soberano de Nayarit y cómputo y Declaratoria de Aprobación de la
Reforma, Periódico Oficial 079. Organo del Gobierno de Nayarit.
Goldstein, P., Stewart, G., 1972. Trends in therapeutic abortion in San
Francisco. Am. J. Public Health 62, 695–699.
Goodman-Bacon, A., 2018. Difference-in-Differences with Variation in
Treatment Timing. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper 25018.
Goodman-Bacon, A., Goldring, T., Nichols, A., 2019. BACONDECOMP:
Stata Module to Perform a Bacon Decomposition of
Difference-in-Differences Estimation.
Grimes, D.A., 2005. Risks of mifepristone abortion in context.
Contraception 71, 161.

Grimes, D.A., Benson, J., Singh, S., Romero, M., Ganatra, B., Okonofua, F.E.,
Shah, I.H., 2006. Unsafe abortion: the preventable pandemic. Lancet
368, 1908–1919.
Guldi, M., 2008. Fertility effects of abortion and birth control pill access
for minors. Demography 45, 817–827.
Gutierrez-Vazquez, E.Y., Parrado, E.A., 2015. Abortion Legalization and
Fertility Rates in Mexico. University of Pennsylvania (Unpublished
manuscript) http://paa2015.princeton.edu/uploads/151146.
Guttmacher Institute, 2012. Facts on Induced Abortion Worldwide.
Haddad, L.B., Nour, N.M., 2009. Unsafe abortion: unnecessary maternal
mortality. Obstet. Gynecol. 2, 122–126.
Henderson, J.T., Puri, M., Blum, M., Harper, C.C., Rana, A., Gurung, G.,
Pradhan, N., Regmi, K., Malla, K., Sharma, S., et al., 2013. Effects of
abortion legalization in Nepal, 2001–2010. PLOS ONE 8, e64775.
Jewkes, R., Brown, H., Dickson-Tetteh, K., Levin, J., Rees, H., et al., 2002.
Prevalence of morbidity associated with abortion before and after
legalisation in South Africa. Br. Med. J. 324, 1252–1253.
Johnson, T., 2013. Guaranteed access to safe and legal abortions: the true
revolution of Mexico City’s legal reforms regarding abortion.
Columbia Hum. Rights Law Rev. 44, 437–476.
Joyce, T., Kaestner, R., 1996. The effect of expansions in medicaid income
eligibility on abortion. Demography 33, 181–192.
Juarez, F., Singh, S., Garcia, S.G., Olavarrieta, C.D., 2008. Estimates of
induced abortion in Mexico: what’s changed between 1990 and
2006? Int. Fam. Plan. Perspect., 158–168.
Kahan, R.S., Baker, L.D., Freeman, M.G., 1975. The effect of legalized
abortion on morbidity resulting from criminal abortion. Am. J.
Obstet. Gynecol. 121, 114–116.
Kane, T.J., Staiger, D., 1996. Teen motherhood and abortion access. Q. J.
Econ. 111, 467–506.
Koch, E., Chireau, M., Pliego, F., Stanford, J., Haddad, S., Calhoun, B.,
Aracena, P., Bravo, M., Gatica, S., Thorp, J., 2015. Abortion legislation,
maternal healthcare, fertility, female literacy, sanitation, violence
against women and maternal deaths: a natural experiment in 32
Mexican states. BMJ Open 5, e006013.
Kulczycki, A., 2011. Abortion in Latin America: changes in practice,
growing conflict, and recent policy developments. Stud. Fam. Plan.
42, 199–220.
Lahey, J.N., 2014. The effect of anti-abortion legislation on nineteenth
century fertility. Demography 51, 939–948.
Lauletta, M., 2019. Abortion Decriminalization and Domestic Violence:
Evidence from Mexico, Tesis de Maestría en Economía 10908-17085.
Universidad de San Andrés. Departamento de Economía.
Levine, P.B., Trainor, A.B., Zimmerman, D.J., 1996. The effect of medicaid
abortion funding restrictions on abortions, pregnancies and births. J.
Health Econ. 15, 555–578.
Lindo, J., Myers, C., Schlosser, A., Cunningham, S., 2019. How far is too
far?: New evidence on abortion clinic closures, access, and abortions.
J. Hum. Resour.
Loudon, I., 1992. Death in Childbirth. An International Study of Maternal
Care and Maternal Mortality 1800–1950. 1992. Clarendon Press
Oxford, Oxford.
Madrazo, A., 2009. The evolution of Mexico City’s abortion laws: from
public morality to women’s autonomy. Int. J. Gynecol. Obstet. 106,
266–269.
Mbele, A., Snyman, L., Pattinson, R.C., 2006. Impact of the choice on
termination of pregnancy act on maternal morbidity and mortality
in the west of Pretoria. S. Afr. Med. J. 96, 1196–1198.
Mitrut, A., Wolff, F.-C., 2011. The impact of legalized abortion on child
health outcomes and abandonment. Evidence from Romania. J.
Health Econ. 30, 1219–1231.
Mondragón y Kalb, M., Ahued Ortega, A., Morales Velazquez, J., Diaz
Olavarrieta, C., Valencia Rodriguez, J., Becker, D., Garcia, S., 2011.
Patient characteristics and service trends following abortion
legalization in Mexico City, 2007–10. Am. J. Public Health 3, 159–166.
Myers, C.K., 2017. The power of abortion policy: reexamining the effects
of young women’s access to reproductive control. J. Polit. Econ. 125,
2178–2224.
Nunes, F.E., Delph, Y.M., 1997. Making abortion law reform work: steps
and slips in Guyana. Reprod. Health Matters 5, 66–76.
Oreffice, S., 2007. Did the legalization of abortion increase women’s
household bargaining power? Evidence from labor supply. Rev. Econ.
Househ. 5, 181–207.
Pazol, K., Creanga, A.A., Burley, K.D., Jamieson, D.J., 2014. Abortion
Surveillance – United States, 2011. Division of Reproductive Health,
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, CDC, Tech. Rep.
Pérez-Pérez, E., Serván-Mori, E., Nigenda, G., Ávila-Burgos, L.,
Mayer-Foulkes, D., 2019. Government expenditure on health and
22

D.Clarke and H.Mühlrad Journal of Health Economics 76 (2021) 102413
maternal mortality in México: a spatial-econometric analysis. Int. J.
Health Plan. Manag. 34, 619–635.
Pop-Eleches, C., 2010. The supply of birth control methods, education,
and fertility: evidence from Romania. J. Hum. Resour. 45, 971–997.
Rambachan, A., Roth, J., 2019. An Honest Approach to Parallel Trends.
Mimeo Harvard University.
Rees, H., Katzenellenbogen, J., Shabodien, R., Jewkes, R., Fawcus, S.,
Mclntyre, J., Lombard, C., Truter, H., 1997. The epidemiology of
incomplete abortion in South Africa. S. Afr. Med. J. 87, 432–437.
Rodríguez-Aguilar, R., 2018. Maternal mortality in Mexico, beyond
millennial development objectives: an age-period-cohort model.
PLOS ONE 13, e0194607.
Sahatci, E., 1993. Legal Abortion Improved Women’s Health in Albania.
Newsletter (Women’s Global Network on Reproductive Rights), pp.
10.
Sánchez Fuentes, M.L., Paine, J., Elliott-Buettner, B., 2008. The
decriminalisation of abortion in Mexico City: how did abortion rights
become a political priority? Gend. Dev. 16, 345–360.
Schiavon, R., Collado, M.E., Troncoso, E., Soto Sánchez, J.E., Zorrilla, G.O.,
Palermo, T., 2010. Characteristics of private abortion services in
Mexico City after legalization. Reprod. Health Matters 18, 127–135.
Schiavon, R., Troncoso, E., Polo, G., 2012. Analysis of maternal and
abortion-related mortality in Mexico over the last two decades,
1990–2008. Int. J. Gynecol. Obstet. 118, S78–S86.
Serbanescu, F., Morris, L., Stupp, P., Stanescu, A., 1995. The impact of
recent policy changes on fertility, abortion, and contraceptive use in
Romania. Stud. Fam. Plan., 76–87.
Seward, P.N., Ballard, C.A., Ulene, A.L., 1973. The effect of legal abortion
on the rate of septic abortion at a large county hospital. Am. J. Obstet.
Gynecol. 115, 335–338.
Singh, K., Ratnam, S., 2015. The influence of abortion legislation on
maternal mortality. Int. J. Gynecol. Obstet. 63, 123–129.
Singh, S., Remez, L., Tartaglione, A., 2010. Methodologies for Estimating
Abortion Incidence and Abortion-Related Morbidity: A Review.
Guttmacher Institute.
Singh, S., Sedgh, G., Bankole, A., Hussain, R., London, S., 2012. Making
Abortion Services Accessible in the Wake of Legal Reforms: A
Framework and Six Case Studies. Guttmacher Institute, Tech. Rep.

Special Investigations Division, Committee of Government Reform,
House of Representatives, 2003. Politics and Science in the Bush
Administration. Prepared for Rep. Henry A. Waxman,
http://democrats.oversight.house.gov/images/stories/documents/
20080130103545.pdf (accessed 02.06.18)
http://web.archive.org/web/20121215150603/.
Stephenson, P., Wagner, M., Badea, M., Serbanescu, F., 1992.
Commentary: the public health consequences of restricted induced
abortion-lessons from Romania. Am. J. Public Health 82, 1328–1331.
Stewart, G.K., Goldstein, P.J., 1971. Effects on septic abortion and
maternal mortality. Obstet. Gynecol. 37, 510–514.
Suh, S., 2014. Rewriting abortion: deploying medical records in
jurisdictional negotiation over a forbidden practice in Senegal. Soc.
Sci. Med. 108, 20–33.
Sully, E., Biddlecom, A., Darroch, J., Ashford, L., Lince-Deroche, N., Riley,
T., et al., 2019. Adding It Up: Investing in Sexual and Reproductive
Health. Guttmacher Institute, New York, NY.
United Nations, 2014. Abortion Policies and Reproductive Health Around
the World 2014.
Velasco Sustaita, B.B. (Undated), Recomendación de Códigos CIE-10a
Diagnósticos Médicos en Escenarios a Gran Escala, Thesis, Instituto
Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica y Electrónica.
Venator, J., Fletcher, J., 2019. Undue Burden Beyond Texas: An Analysis of
Abortion Clinic Closures, Births, and Abortions in Wisconsin. National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers 26362.
Winikoff, B., Sheldon, W.R., 2012. Abortion: what is the problem? Lancet
379, 594–596.
World Health Organization, 2011. Unsafe Abortion: Global and Regional
Estimates of the Incidence of Unsafe Abortion and Associated
Mortality in 2008, Edition 6. WHO Library.
World Health Organization, 2015. Thinking Healthy: A Manual for
Psychosocial Management of Perinatal Depression, WHO Generic
Field-Trial Version 1.0, 2015. World Health Organization, Tech. Rep.
World Health Organization, 2018. Preventing Unsafe Abortion,

http://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/preventing-
unsafe-abortion (consulted 28.08.18).