Active Power Curtailment in Power System Planning
ABSTRACT In regions with high penetration of Distributed Energy Resources (DER), grid congestion is
mostly caused by power feed-in of generators. In this context, conventional approaches for solving the grid
congestion problems are Active Power Curtailment (APC) of DER and grid reinforcement. In the wake of
increased DER generation, it is not only of interest how to obtain the grid reinforcement, but also how to
consider APC during grid planning. The challenge of such grid planning is to determine the best combination
of reinforcement and APC. We present a new grid planning method and use it to find the trade-off between
APC and grid reinforcement in a case study of a High-Voltage (HV) grid with a future renewable energy
scenario. We compare the proposed reinforcement method to two existing methods. With the combination of
APC and grid reinforcement, the proposed method shows a decrease regarding the total expenditures.

I. INTRODUCTION
THE increased development of Distributed Energy
Resources (DER) can lead to grid congestion, which
means that power lines would have to be operated above
their nominal current limit in order to transport all the electricity generated. This would lead to inadmissible levels of
sag of overhead conductors and damage of power system
equipment. Active power curtailment (APC) can be used to
maintain line operation within the loading limits by temporarily reducing the output of some generators during peak
times [1]. Although it is effective to maintain congestion-free
grid operation, APC incurs high costs due to the remuneration
of curtailed energy or the need to procure flexibility services.
The costs incurred due to APC can be treated differently
depending on the country. For example, in Germany, the costs
of APC are reflected in the grid fees, and in the UK whether
the DER operators are compensated depends on the grid
level [2].
Besides APC, grid congestion can be mitigated by reinforcing the grid. New power lines can be constructed in
place of those overloaded to increase the transport capabilities
of the grid. We do not consider new right-of-ways due to
the regulatory approval delays that they entail. In general,
High-Voltage (HV) grids have meshed topology and consist of overhead power lines. Due to the meshed structure,
the change of impedance caused by reinforcement of a line
impacts the loading of other lines. This effect must be considered in the HV grid planning process.
While planning the reinforcement of a power system, combining the reinforcement and APC can be an opportunity to
reduce the total expenditures and potentially achieve a more
cost-efficient outcome than with either measure separately.
It has been suggested to reinforce the grid up to a certain point
and apply APC to remove the remaining congestion [3]. Nevertheless, finding the best way to combine APC and reinforcement requires a specific and thorough approach. An effective
way to determine a cost-efficient combination of APC and
reinforcement is essential to obtain such a trade-off point.
In this paper we introduce a novel method to determine
which power lines to reinforce by analyzing the impact
of line reinforcement on the total expenditures (TOTEX).
We consider the costs of APC as part of the general expenditures of the system from the macroeconomic perspective
and incorporate them into the grid planning decisions. A line
reinforcement increases the TOTEX due to the capital expenditure (CAPEX) of investing in the new line. At the same
time, it can reduce the operating expenditure (OPEX) by
avoiding the APC that is associated with the line. We express
reinforcement investments as an equivalent annual cost and
add the OPEX (defined as the costs of APC) to obtain the
TOTEX. This method demonstrates its inventiveness, in that
it attributes a portion of the overall APC to a specific line. The
method then selects the lines that lead to the lowest increase
of TOTEX for reinforcement. This approach aims to optimize
the allocation of capital rather than minimizing the technical
indicator of overloading. We compare the proposed method
to the similar existing methods that are based on line overloading by conducting a case study of an HV grid in northern
Germany. Based on the results of the case study, we discuss
the impact of APC on grid planning and demonstrate how the
trade-off between APC and reinforcement can be determined.
Our findings will be of interest to Distribution System
Operators (DSOs) that experience a high penetration of DER
and need to decide whether to use APC or grid reinforcement,
or select a particular combination.
II. RELATED WORK
A number of approaches to define which lines to reinforce have been covered in various articles [4], [5]. Discrete optimization methods such as branch-and-bound [6]
and branch-exchange [7] are computationally expensive due
to the large size of the solution space [8]. Numerical methods like mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) provide
an accurate solution [4] but can encounter computational
limitations [5] and require linearization and relaxation of
their formulations when applied to realistic problems. Mathematical solvers often do not converge for realistically large
problems [9]. In contrast, heuristic methods can be applied
to complex grid models [4] to determine a satisfactory solution for the grid planning problem. Heuristic methods use
a set of operations to generate a candidate solution, assess
the solution, and modify it until the termination criterion is
reached [10]. A common approach is a greedy heuristic, also
known as a ranking algorithm [11]. The lines are reinforced
one-by-one, starting with the most overloaded one, and the
load flow calculation is repeated after every such line reinforcement [12], [13]. A further development of this approach
is a ranking of lines based on a sensitivity index (SI) that considers the increase of the line transport capacity in relation to
the required investment [3]. We analyze the total expenditures
that are obtained by using two variants of ranking algorithms,
with the line loading and the sensitivity index as the criterion,
and compare them with the method introduced in this paper.
With active power curtailment (APC), the grid is brought
to a contingency-free operating condition by curtailing the
output of some of the generators. A widespread approach to
obtain the cost-optimal allocation of curtailment for every
generator is based on solving a linear programming (LP)
problem, which is defined using distribution factors (DF) [1],
[3], [14]–[18]. The DF represent a linear approximation of the
load flow at a given operational point of the grid. DF based on
AC load flow is used in an LP problem formulation in [14] to
obtain cost-optimal APC. We further enhance this method by
iteratively applying the output of the optimization to the grid
and re-calculating the DF to ensure a more accurate result.
The idea of integrating curtailment of loads [11] or generators [3] in the grid planning process is not new. The total
expenditures (TOTEX) have been used to find the trade-off
between grid reinforcement and APC in [3], showing that it is
a viable grid planning strategy. We introduce a novel method
of grid reinforcement, which achieves a lower TOTEX for
the trade-off point than other existing methods. The solution
obtained with our method is valid for AC power flow and can
be applied in AC context. The methods based on mathematical optimization sometimes have convergence difficulties [9].
Alternatively, a method that approaches the solution iteratively is guaranteed to deliver a result, though not necessarily
an optimal one. This is the approach we selected for our
method.

III. ITERATIVE GRID REINFORCEMENT
The grid is planned for a specific future scenario that is represented with time series data of generation and consumption
in a target year. The grid is reinforced in an iterative process,
one line at a time (Fig.1). After loading the grid data and the
time series data, the grid is evaluated in a static time series
simulation, i.e. a load flow calculation is executed for every
grid condition, one-by-one, that changes with the time steps
that represent a given year. The results of the time series
simulation are analyzed to identify grid congestion. If grid
congestion occurred at any time step, the possible reinforcement options are identified based on the required transport
capacity. Next, a sensitivity index (SI) is calculated for every
reinforcement option. This step depends on the particular
implementation of the used method, which is described in
Sections IV-A, IV-B and V. Next, the reinforcement options
are ranked based on their SI, and the line reinforcement
with the highest SI is applied. Finally, the selected line reinforcement is added to the overall set of reinforced lines.
After the selected line is replaced by a new line, the process
repeats. As soon as the grid is no longer congested, the algorithm terminates. The CAPEX (expressed as the equivalent annual cost) and OPEX (costs of APC) corresponding
to every iteration are analyzed and the trade-off point is
obtained.
A curve of the relationship between TOTEX and CAPEX
can be obtained by calculating TOTEX for every incremental step of grid reinforcement (as in the schematic example
in Fig.2 illustrating a comparison for two fictive methods).
Every point of the curve represents a grid with a subset of
its lines reinforced. To obtain every such point, a time series
simulation of one year is required in order to evaluate the
maximally occurring overloading of the lines and to calculate the amount of APC that is necessary to maintain the
grid operation with no overloading. The sum of the costs of
APC (OPEX) and the CAPEX of grid reinforcement constitutes the TOTEX of the grid at a given point. At the leftmost
point, no lines are reinforced, the APC is the highest, and
the CAPEX equals to zero. Every next point to the right is
obtained by reinforcing an additional overloaded line and
calculating the APC that is required to avoid the overloading
of the remaining lines. With every further reinforced line,
the CAPEX increases and the TOTEX decreases due to the
reduction of the necessary APC. After a certain point, any
additional line reinforcement would increase the TOTEX,
because the corresponding increase of CAPEX outweighs the
reduction of the OPEX. With the help of this curve, the tradeoff point can be obtained, which describes the amount of
investment in grid reinforcement that leads to the lowest
TOTEX. At this point, the searched combination of APC and
grid reinforcement is obtained.
The method to rank and select the lines for reinforcement
influences the curve that describes the dependence of TOTEX
on CAPEX and the obtained trade-off point. We introduce a
new method of ranking the lines based on their contribution to
TOTEX and compare it to two existing methods. The TOTEX
resulting from the different line reinforcement measures is
used to compare and evaluate the used methods.
In the following sections, we describe two often used
ranking methods [3], [13] and introduce our new method.
Afterwards, the introduced method is compared to the existing methods in a case study.
IV. STATE OF THE ART RANKING APPROACH FOR LINE
REINFORCEMENT
The existing ranking-based methods to select line reinforcement use line loading as their main criterion. In the following,
we describe two common variants of this approach.
A. LOADING METHOD
A straightforward method of grid planning in HV grids would
be to iteratively reinforce the lines starting with the most overloaded ones, similarly to [11], [13], [17], [19], [20]. In this
case, the lines are selected based on a technical criterion of
line overloading. The values of the highest loading of every
line during all analyzed time steps is obtained in the step of
the evaluation of the grid (see Fig.1) via load flow calculation.
A sensitivity index SI Loading
L
is calculated for every line L
from the set of all lines and used to select the next line for
reinforcement. For the loading criterion, the sensitivity index
for a given line is the maximal value of the line loading (the
observed current IL,t divided by the rated current Imax,L) over
all the calculated time steps t ∈ 1 . . . N (Eq. (1)). The line
with the highest value of SI Loading
L
is the one with the highest
loading. We refer to this approach as the loading method.

B. CAPEX METHOD
An alternative method to define the sensitivity index combines the impact of a particular line reinforcement on line
transport capacity with the CAPEX of its reinforcement [3],
[11]. The sensitivity index SICAPEX
L
for a line L is defined
based on the loading of the line in relation to the CAPEX of
the reinforcement of the line, CAPEXL (Eq. (2)). We call this
C. EXAMPLE AND DISCUSSION OF LINE RANKING
METHODS
The impact of the order in which lines are reinforced can be
illustrated using the example in Fig.3. The output of both
generators, G1 and G2, must be curtailed to maintain the
loading of both lines L1 and L2 below the limit of 100 %.
If the line L1 is reinforced, the overloading of the line L1 is
eliminated and the curtailment of the generator G1 is no
longer necessary. The output of G2 would still need to be
curtailed to avoid the overloading of the line L2. However,
the overall curtailment is reduced. If the line L2 is replaced
instead of L1, the line L1 would still be overloaded and the
curtailment of G1 would increase slightly due to the omission
of losses in the line L2. In this example, choosing the line
that has the highest overloading does not have an additional
benefit of improving the grid condition. This example demonstrates that it is necessary to use a method that considers the
APC for line ranking. Furthermore, the differences in APC
costs (OPEX) must be considered alongside the differences
in the line reinforcement CAPEX. Next, we introduce the
TOTEX method that considers the impact of line reinforcement on APC.

V. OBTAINING GRID REINFORCEMENT BASED ON
TOTEX
We call the method that we are introducing in this paper
the TOTEX method. Within this method, we rank lines by
their contribution to the reduction of the sum of CAPEX,
expressed as the equivalent annual cost, and the OPEX (costs
of APC). To this end, we define the sensitivity index SI TOTEX
L
that associates a particular overloaded line with the expected
reduction of the TOTEX as the result of its replacement.
To calculate the contribution of a single line to the overall
APC, we repeat the calculation of APC while only considering the loading limit for the particular line. The calculation of
APC involves two steps that are repeated consecutively: the
AC load flow to establish the power balance and calculate
the AC distribution factors (DF) for the operational point,
and an optimization step to obtain the required APC. In the
following, this approach is described in more detail.
A. CALCULATING ACTIVE POWER CURTAILMENT
Different methods of calculating the required APC have been
described in literature [21]–[24]. We are using the linear
programming (LP) approach because of its high reliability,
very high speed of calculation, and excellent convergence
properties [22], [23].
We define a linear programming (LP) problem based on
distribution factors (DF) so as to obtain the reduction of
power injection that is required to satisfy the constraints
of line loading limits, while minimizing the overall costs of
APC. The optimization problem is solved separately from
solving the load flow equations.

1) DISTRIBUTION FACTORS
In the matrix of distribution factors DF =
dIft
dPk
, the rows
represent branches and the columns represent grid buses
(set K). Every element of the matrix describes a change of
the current dIft through the branch that connects the buses
f , t that is caused by the change of the injected power dPk
at the bus k ∈ K. The DF are obtained by first calculating
the voltage sensitivity from the change of bus power injection
based on the Jacobian matrix from Newton-Raphson load
flow calculation, similarly to [25] and, in the second step,
by applying the chain rule to partial derivative matrices of
current and voltage. The method to obtain the distribution
factors is described in more detail in the appendix. As the
distribution factors are a linear approximation of the load flow
at a given operational point of the grid, they are accurate only
close to the point they are calculated for due to non-linearity
of the AC load flow problem [15], [26]. Therefore, if the grid
operation point is changed, the DF need to be recalculated.

2) CALCULATION OF CURTAILED ACTIVE POWER
Using the DF, we can formulate the LP problem to calculate
the necessary APC, as follows (Eq. (3)).

The DF refer to buses, therefore also the costs and the
curtailment represent the aggregated values at buses. The
objective of the LP problem is to minimize the sum of the curtailment costs defined as P(c
T
K
· 4PK ) at every bus k ∈ K.
The individual cost of curtailment is defined as vector cK .

The vector 4PK reflects the active power curtailment, which
is defined as the available active power injection minus the
active power injection after curtailment. Using the generation
reference system, which is correspondent to the DF calculation, 4PK is always equal or greater than zero. The linear
approximation of the current change in branch (f , t) caused
by the curtailment of 4PK equals to (DFft ·4PK ). The second
inequality constraint guarantees that the current limit will not
be exceeded in case of a reversal of current flows, similarly
to the implementation in [27]. Adding the initial values of
the branch current Ift yields the branch current after the
curtailment 4PK . To ensure that the resulting branch currents
are below the maximal current limit, the right side of the
inequality constraint is the current limit of the branch Imax,ft .
Moreover, the curtailed power must not exceed the current
available active power injection Pmax,K , which is limited by
the installed capacity as well as the availability of the natural
resource such as wind and solar radiation.
In order to accurately enforce the constraints, we iterate
solving the LP problem and calculating the AC load flow
until the desired accuracy is achieved. This ensures that the
obtained solution matches the operation point of the grid.
The costs of curtailment can be set individually for every
bus and time step. It is also possible to set individual line
loading limits, for example to account for dynamic line rating
(DLR).
B. ATTRIBUTION OF APC TO INDIVIDUAL LINES
After the overall APC is calculated it is still not clear what
amount every single line ‘‘contributes’’ to the APC. In order
to determine the required grid reinforcement based on the
minimization of TOTEX, the curtailed power must be allocated to individual lines. In order to determine these values,
we modify the LP problem to only consider the constraint
for a single line. Solving the modified LP for every line oneby-one attributes parts of the overall APC to individual lines.
The DF matrices are not updated for this step, because the
operational point of the grid is not changed after the overall
APC is obtained.
To this end, the row DFft corresponding to the line (f , t)
(Eq. (4)) is used to formulate a linear programming problem,
similarly to Eq. (3), except that only the constraint for the
selected line is considered:

The row DFft is multiplied by the results of the APC
calculation 4PK , leading to the reduction of the power flowing through the line (f , t). The curtailment at every bus is
obtained with a linear solver, and the sum of the values for
curtailed power is attributed to the line (f , t).
In the context of the reinforcement method, this value
represents the portion of curtailment that is directly caused
by the line (f , t) and is attributed to it.

This approach ignores any possible superposition with the
solutions for other lines, and therefore the sum of individual line curtailments is not guaranteed to match the overall
results of the APC in the grid. Coming back to the example
in Fig.3, the APC of 16.21 MW is required if both lines are
considered together (Table 1). Both generators are curtailed
to remove overloading. When attributing the APC to L1 and
L2, the individual curtailments of generators are different
(Table 2). While there is a mismatch in the curtailment of
individual generators, this approach is helpful at selecting the
lines that contribute the most to the APC. The line L1 would
be prioritized according to this approach, because the APC
attributed to it is higher, which is in line with the discussion
in Section IV-C (provided that the CAPEX do not outweigh
the reduction of APC).
C. SENSITIVITY INDEX
With this method, we intend to prioritize the line replacements that reduce the APC more effectively, even if they
lead to a higher value of CAPEX. Although reinforcing the
line with the highest SI increases the TOTEX by the amount
required to reinforce the line, the APC is reduced and so
are the costs to maintain the operation of the grid within the
line loading limits. This way, the SI reflects an economic
evaluation of the investment and operation expenditures that
are relevant for the grid as a whole, rather than a technical
evaluation of individual lines.

Equation (5) describes the calculation of SI TOTEX
L
for a
given line L. The costs of APC that are attributed to a line
L are calculated as a sum of the APC attributed to the line
(1PK,t,L) over all the time steps t ∈ 1..N, multiplied by the
costs per the unit of curtailed energy, cK . As the result of subtracting the CAPEX for reinforcing the line from the OPEX,
the value of SI TOTEX
L
represents a reduction of TOTEX that
can be achieved by reinforcing the line L.

VI. CASE STUDY
Based on publicly available data [28]–[31], we developed a
power system model that consists of the High-Voltage (HV)
grid in the German federal state of Schleswig-Holstein and
includes a relevant part of the Extra-High-Voltage (EHV)
grid (Fig.4). The detailed representation of the EHV grid
allows to accurately represent transit flows and the interactions between the EHV grid and the HV grid [32]. The large
size of the grid, an inclusion of several voltage levels and
local control of grid assets (e.g. transformer tap changers)
present additional challenges for grid planning. We intend to
demonstrate that our method can be utilized for such grids.
The grid model already includes the reinforcement that
is required in the time frame until the year 2025 that have
so far been planned and published by the distribution and
transmission system operators. Therefore, the year 2025 is
used as the starting point of the case study. The time series
data for consumption and generation in the year 2035 are
used to represent the target state for the planning of grid
reinforcement.
We used the software pandapower [33] for the grid modeling and calculations, the interior-point linear program solver
as implemented in CVXOPT [34] to obtain the APC, and
MPI4py [35] to enable parallel time series calculations.
In the following, important components of the grid model
and the investigated scenario of consumption and generation
in the year 2035 are presented. Finally, the results of grid
reinforcement using three different methods are introduced
and discussed.
A. GRID MODEL
The HV grid is divided in four separate zones (Fig.4), which
are all connected to the EHV grid. The HV grid zones are not
directly interconnected at the HV level, and the reinforcement
results can be determined for each zone separately. The grid
model has 157 buses in the HV level, where the consumption
and generation is connected, and 23 EHV/HV substations.
There are 530 HV line sections with the total circuit length
of 3360 km.
Voltage control is implemented using shunt reactors in
the EHV grid, as well as extended ward equivalents that
represent remote generators. The power balance in the grid
is maintained by the load flow calculation with distributed
slack. To this end, the difference at the slack bus is distributed among the transit buses in the EHV grid, weighed
according to the installed capacity of the connected power
lines. If a power system has voltage violations in addition to
line overloading, the calculation can be extended to include
reactive power control. Because the solution is AC-feasible,
the influence of reactive power control on line overloading
can be accounted for. In our case, the grid model has no
voltage limit violations. Therefore, the voltage limits are not
considered and the case study does not include reactive power
control.
The equivalent annual costs of line reinforcement and the
considered line types (Table 3) are based on the assumptions
in [20]. Line reinforcements are bundled in combined measures that include all the necessary changes to the grid model
that must be applied together. This approach ensures that the
power poles carry the same specific weight on both sides.
The costs of APC are assumed at 100 e/MWh, which is in
line with the curtailment cost of wind generation in Germany
in 2017 [36]. This assumption is used solely to demonstrate
the approach of the calculation and the method to obtain the
trade-off between grid reinforcement and APC, as the costs of
curtailment vary among different countries. We assume equal
costs for DER curtailment at all buses of the grid. It is possible
to use individual costs for every bus and time step.

B. INVESTIGATED SCENARIOS
The time series data for the year 2035 provide the specifications of consumption and generation. The installed power
and the total annual energy for the starting year 2025 and
the target year 2035 in the HV voltage level can be seen
in Table 4. The installed power of generation is higher than
the peak consumption by a multiple because the region has
a particularly high potential for wind power. Thus, it can be
expected that the demand for reinforcement in the considered
grid is driven by generation and not consumption, which
provides a suitable use-case to study the potential of APC.
The scenario data contain hourly time series for generation
and consumption at every bus of the HV grid, as well as transit
flows to adjacent EHV grids.
We use the load and generation profiles from the research
project NEW 4.0 that represent a forecast of the year
2035 [37]. The weather-dependent loads and generators have
their behavior modeled according to the weather data from
the year 2012. The time series data for the remaining categories of generation and consumption are based on a European spot market model. The profiles of generation and
consumption data are presented in more detail in [38]. Our
calculations in the case study have the time resolution of one
hour and reflect a time period of one year.

C. REINFORCEMENT RESULTS
The variations of grid reinforcement, from no reinforcement
and the highest APC to the full reinforcement with no more
violations and no more APC, define the range of the available
budget allocations between grid reinforcement and APC. The
lowest value of the TOTEX defines the amount of investment
in grid reinforcements that represents the desired trade-off
between CAPEX and OPEX. The grid reinforcement and
APC for the studied grid (Fig.4) have been obtained by
applying the methods described in Section IV and Section V.
The resulting expenditures that are necessary to eliminate lineoverloading in every zone of the HV grid can be used to
compare the analyzed methods (Table 5). The results include
the expenditures for the trade-off points of the three methods,
as well as for the reference scenarios of no reinforcement
(only APC is used to avoid overloading) and full reinforcement according to the Loading method (no APC is required).
The highest TOTEX in all four zones are observed when all
congestion situations are eliminated by only using APC. All
the results for the trade-off points obtained by three different
reinforcement methods lead to the lower TOTEX than if congestion were addressed with full reinforcement. The lowest
TOTEX for every zone are achieved by using the TOTEX
method. Full reinforcement leads to 35 % to 254 % higher
TOTEX than a combination of APC and reinforcement.
The planning of grid reinforcement is impacted by the
assumed costs of APC. For the APC to have parity with full
reinforcement, the costs of APC should equal 58 e/MWh
for the zone Flensburg, 91 e/MWh for the zone Göhl,
98 e/MWh for Heide-West and 59 e/MWh for Kummerfeld.
The trade-off point is also affected by the assumption of the
APC costs. With the TOTEX method, the cost assumptions
of APC can also affect the order of line reinforcements.
A challenge of grid reinforcement using a constructive
heuristic is that an addition of certain lines can cause an
increase in line overloading, as identified in [11]. In addition,
it is often necessary to add a sequence of line measures
in a path until the congestion is solved, while any single
line reinforcement in the sequence leads only to a small
improvement [11]. We have observed this effect to be more
pronounced with the method that is based on line overloading.
For instance, it can be seen in Fig.5 that an addition of a
line reinforcement in the zone Flensburg (marked with red)
causes an increase of the loading of several lines in the
same path, and reduces the loading in other lines that form
a different path. The mentioned line reinforcement reduces
the impedance in the affected path and therefore causes an
increase of the power flow through it, leading to an increase
of loading. The reinforcement of the path of the affected lines
reduces the APC substantially.
In the situation described in Fig.5, the proposed method
assigns similar curtailment costs to all the lines that belong to
the same path as the highlighted line. The distribution factors
associated with those lines are similar and therefore the lines
on the same path are reinforced as a sequence, even if the
lines of the sequence have different properties and do not
have the highest overloading in the grid. In contrast, the Loading method only considers the overloading regardless of the
associated curtailment, which can cause comparatively high
OPEX throughout the progression of the reinforcement. This
effect is responsible for the strong increase and a subsequent
reduction of TOTEX at a later point for the Loading method
in the zones Flensburg and Göhl (Fig.6), and the TOTEX
method avoids such spikes because it follows the path of the
fastest reduction of APC.
The impact of the increase in reinforcement investment on
TOTEX is seen in Fig.6. A trade-off between the CAPEX
of reinforcement and the costs of APC exists for all zones
and line selection methods. The lines that correspond to the
TOTEX method have a steadier course than the line for the
loading method. Due to this effect, it would not be correct to
stop the calculation as soon as the TOTEX start rising again in
order to determine the trade-off point. If the complete curve is
not required, the calculation can be terminated after the costs
have started rising and are above the trade-off point with a
safety margin.

D. COMPUTATIONAL COST
The computational cost for the analyzed methods is expressed
as the time needed to achieve the result (Table 6). It can
be seen, that the TOTEX method requires 357 % to 372 %
more time to obtain the results. The calculation has been
performed using 450 CPU cores on a computing cluster with
the Intel Xeon E5-2620 v3 2.4 GHz CPUs. A sizable portion
of the time stated here must be attributed to overhead e.g. for
communication between the processes or reading and writing
data. The values in the table are presented for the parallel
calculation (not the sum of time used per process. When
considering the computational cost of the proposed method,
it is to note that our implementation has some potential for
improvement in terms of its computational efficiency.
Such rather high computation time can be attributed to the
need to calculate multiple time series calculations, once for
every data point in Fig.6. In the case of the TOTEX method,
a load flow calculation and an LP optimization occur multiple
times in the time steps that have grid congestion
VII. CONCLUSION
We introduced a new grid reinforcement method for meshed
HV grids that considers APC and follows the path of the
lowest total expenditure. A combination of APC and grid
reinforcement has a trade-off point which corresponds to
the lowest expenditures and leads to substantial savings in
comparison to solving grid congestion only with reinforcement or only with active power curtailment. The results of
the case study demonstrate that the proposed method that
uses TOTEX for line ranking has advantages over using line
overloading as reference. In particular, grid reinforcement
with consideration of curtailment costs achieves a solution
with a lower TOTEX for the trade-off point than the methods
based on loading.
The proposed method to find the trade-off between the grid
reinforcement and APC can be used to optimize the expenditures of grid operation and grid expansion, and increase
planning certainty by deferring grid reinforcement. During
a period of increasing DER capacity, the DSO can prioritize
certain reinforcement options that have the strongest impact
on APC, while still targeting the trade-off point. Therefore,
combining APC and reinforcement rather than reinforcing the
grid completely is more advantageous for a DSO in terms of
expenditures and planning certainty.
The calculation presented in the case study can be extended
in practice. Although we used equal costs per bus and constant line ratings, the method can be used with individually
set costs and with weather-dependent limits of line loading.
406 VOLUME 8, 2021
Bolgaryn et al.: Active Power Curtailment in Power System Planning
Furthermore, if the grid has voltage limit violations, reactive
power control strategies can be applied alongside the calculation. The impact of reactive power on line loading is included
because the method is based on solving AC load flow.
Even though our implementation can be improved in terms
of its efficiency, there is no doubt that the proposed method is
rather computationally intensive. We suggest that the method
is applicable for the scope that is not time critical, e.g. strategic grid planning. We demonstrate that our method is suitable
for large, realistic grids.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Ihor Kosenko and Ghanshyam Malaviya for their assistance with the work on the grid
model. They are grateful to Sureshkumar Thiyagarajan with
Avacon Netz GmbH, Matthias Dau with Schleswig-Holstein
Netz AG, and Johannes Dasenbrock with Fraunhofer IEE
for their recommendations about the HV grid planning principles. Map data used for the creation of the grid model
are copyrighted by OpenStreetMap contributors and available from https://www.openstreetmap.org. They used MPI
for Python [35] for parallel calculations. They are solely
responsible for the contents of this publication.
