One-step preparation of gel-electrolyte-friendly fiber-shaped aerogel
current collector for solid-state fiber-shaped supercapacitors with
large capacity 

ABSTRACT
Fiber-shaped aerogel conductive structures are a promising template for preparing fiber-shaped supercapacitors
with high length-specific capacitance used in flexible and wearable electronics. The challenge lies in how to
easily infiltrate enough active mass and gel electrolyte into micropores and achieve intimate contact so that the
active mass can be fully utilized for large capacitance and small contact resistance to be obtained for fast rate
response. Here, one-step preparation of gel electrolyte friendly, fiber-shaped conductive and hydrophilic aerogel
is reported, which was produced from electrospinning poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)
(PP) and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) on a centering Ti metal wire. Thanks to the high conductivity of PP, high
hydrophilicity of PEO, high porosity of the aerogel structure and high mass loading of PP, the as-prepared PPPEO/Ti showed a fiber-length-specific capacitance of 68.4 mF cm− 1 and excellent rate performance due to well
infiltration of gel electrolytes. More interestingly, PP-PEO/Ti was used as a template to load polyaniline (PANI).
The as-prepared PANI@PP-PEO/Ti fibers were studied as electrodes in solid-state supercapacitors. A fiberlength-specific capacitance is as large as 136.7 mF cm− 1 was measured. These results suggest our PP-PEO/Ti
is a promising 3D fiber-shaped aerogel structure for high-performance fiber energy storage devices. 

1. Introduction
With their high flexibility, knittability and other merits, fiber-shaped
wearable electronics are receiving ever-growing interest such as solar
cells, triboelectric nanogenerators (NGs), batteries and supercapacitors
(SCs). They are used in energy harvesting devices [1,2], energy storage
devices [3,4], medical devices [5] and fitness [6]. Solid-state fiber-shaped supercapacitors (SSFSS) of high performance with durability and
comfortability have attracted ever-increasing interests [7–11]. However, most reported wet-spinning fiber-shaped electrodes for SSFSS
generally suffer from a poor length-specific capacitance due to their low
mass loading of active materials [12–15], as well as insufficient infiltration of a gel electrolyte in the porous electrode [16,17]. In this regard,
a 3D fiber-shaped conductive aerogel, when used as a template and a
current collector for high mass loading of the active material and deep
infiltration of the gel electrolyte, could be a very promising structure for
developing high-performance SSFSS with high length-specific capacitance [18–22]. So far, very few 3D fiber-shaped aerogel structures as
current collectors were reported, and their complex fabrication methods
may also limit their practical applications [23,24].
Herein, one-step preparation of 3D fluffy fiber-shaped conducting
structure was reported, which is amenable for gel electrolyte infiltration
and can be loaded with a sufficient amount of other active mass. Such a
fiber-shaped structure was made from conductive poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PP) and polyethylene
oxide (PEO) on a centering metal wire in an electrospinning process. In
this process, conductive nanofibers can be controlled standing up
vertically on the collecting metal wire due to charging and electric field
effects, thus forming a fluffy cotton-like aerogel structure. In our work,
by balancing electric field force and gravity on electrospun nanofibers
through adjusting its PEO content, large amounts of fluffy PP-PEO
nanofibers were collected on the rotating Ti wire, resulting in a
macroscopically fiber-shaped and microscopically aerogel structure,
named fiber-shaped aerogel. Its highly conductive PP composition offers
structural conductivity, while its highly hydrophilic PEO renders the
porous structure easily infiltrated with gel electrolytes or other electrochemically active masses. Therefore, this highly porous, conductive
and fiber-shaped PP-PEO/Ti structure is promising for developing solidstate fiber-shaped supercapacitors. Furthermore, PP-PEO/Ti was also
used as the template to load electrochemically active polyaniline
(PANI). The fiber-shaped solid-state supercapacitors fabricated from
PANI@PP-PEO/Ti electrodes displayed a fiber-length-specific capacitance as large as 138.7 mF cm− 1 and good rate performance. The results
demonstrate our PP-PEO/Ti fibers are promising for high-performance
fiber-shaped energy storage devices.

2. Experimental section

2.1. Materials
PEDOT:PSS (PP) solution (PH1000) and PEO powder with 600,000
average molecular weight were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Sulfuric
acid (H2SO4) (98%), hydrochloric acid (HCl) (98%), aniline (98%) and
poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) (MW 89,000–98,000) were all purchased
from Aladdin.

2.2. Fabrication of PP-PEO/Ti
0.12 g PEO were dispersed into 4 g PH1000 and the solution was then
used for electrospinning. In this process, the voltage was set at ~15 kV
and the rotation rate of the Ti wire was controlled at 600 rpm. Through
controlling collection time, PP-PEO/Ti electrodes with different PP-PEO
loading masses of around 0.66, 1.27 and 2.43 mg cm− 1 were achieved.
They are named as PP-PEO-1/Ti, PP-PEO-2/Ti and PP-PEO-3/Ti
(Fig. S3), respectively. The reproducibility of the system was checked
by parallel test (Fig. S2). Relative standard deviation for the attributes of
PP-PEO-1/Ti fibers was calculated using the following equation:

where S is standard deviation, x is average value, xi is the ith data, n is
number of samples.
2.3. Fabrication of PANI@PP-PEO/Ti electrodes
The electro-polymerization of PANI was carried out in a threeelectrode system with PP-PEO/Ti fiber as the working electrode and Pt
as the counter electrode, an aqueous solution of 0.5 M aniline and 1 M
H2SO4 as the electrolyte. The electrodeposition was implemented by
cycling the working electrode potential in the voltage range of 0–0.8 V at
a scan rate of 50 mV s
− 1
.
2.4. Fabrication of solid-state supercapacitors
Two PP-PEO/Ti electrodes were placed in a designed polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) plate (Fig. S3) and fixed by conductive silver
paste and copper tape. The electrodes were then coated with PVA-H2SO4
gel electrolyte.
2.5. Characterization
Surface morphologies of as-prepared samples were characterized by
a scanning electron microscope (Philips-FEI Quanta 200, America). The
cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge-discharge (GCD)
measurements were carried out using an electrochemical workstation
(Chen-hua Chi-660E, Shanghai, China). The specific capacitance (mF
cm− 1
) for a single electrode was calculated using the following equation:

where I is the discharge current, l is the length of the electrode, Δt is the
discharge time and ΔV is the potential window during the discharging
process after excluding the IR drop.

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Preparing 3D PP-PEO/Ti current collector
One-step process to prepare PP-PEO/Ti with millimeter diameter is
schematically depicted in Fig. 1. Different from non-conductive PEO,
electrospun nanofibers of conductive PP-PEO exhibit a standing-up
phenomenon, as observed in Ref. [25] and illustrated in Fig. 1. When
ejected from the electrospinning nozzle, the PP-PEO fibers carry excess
positive charges and electric field force pushes them toward the
grounded metal collector (Process 1). When one end of the PP-PEO fiber
touches the ground, electrons will flow into the positively charged fiber.
These free electrons would gather at the sharply bent tips of the
conductive fiber, leading to the standing-up of the fiber along the vertical electric field direction (Process 2). The fiber will break into sections at the bent tips when the electrostatic force exceeds its tensile
strength (Process 3). The charged fibers affect the electric field distribution and they form self-assembled yarns or bird nest structures
(Figs. S1a and b). Without another counteracting force, these fibers are
difficult to be collected as a film. In this work, through adjusting the
content of PEO in fibers, we balanced the gravity and the electric field
forces on PP-PEO fibers and made them easy to be collected (Fig. S1c),
leading to the cotton-like morphology and high electrical conductivity
of the obtained PP-PEO fibers (Process 3). Fiber-shaped PP-PEO/Ti
electrodes were achieved with different loading masses by controlling
the collection time (Process 4). The relative standard deviation (RSD) of
the PP-PEO/Ti fibers’ mass and diameter is 2.1% and 3.5% respectively,
which leads to the specific capacity of the device with a small RSD
(2.6%). The result indicates that the system has excellent repeatability
(Fig. S2). In this work, PP-PEO/Ti electrodes with different loading
masses of PP-PEO named as PP-PEO-1/Ti, PP-PEO-2/Ti, PP-PEO-3/Ti
were used, and their diameters reach around 1.4, 2.0 and 2.7 mm
(Figs. S2b and S3).
A specifically-designed polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) plate
(Fig. S4) was used as a holder for electrochemical performance tests. The
process to assemble solid-state supercapacitors was schematically shown
in Fig. 2a and an assembled device was displayed as an inset in Fig. 2a.
The diameter of this PP-PEO-3/Ti wire reaches as high as 2.7 mm
(Fig. 2b) and its cross-section shows a highly porous and curly structure
(Fig. 2c). This unique structure, in conjunction with the high conductivity of PP and high hydrophilicity of PEO, renders the as-prepared
highly porose PP-PEO/Ti a promising 3D current collector candidate
for solid-state electrolyte-based devices. As noted, even though the
diameter of PP-PEO/Ti is higher than 2 mm, the PVA-H2SO4 gel electrolyte could still be filled into the whole thickness of the PP-PEO layer
(Fig. 2d), which is an essential requirement to fully use the active mass
of a thick electrode.

3.2. Characterization of PP-PEO/Ti fiber electrodes
The properties of the PP-PEO-3/Ti fiber electrodes were further
characterized in a two-electrode configuration using PVA-H2SO4 as the
liquid electrolyte. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were conducted under scan rates from 10 to 200 mV s
− 1 and the CV curves are
shown in Fig. 3a. The specific capacitance of the PP-PEO-3/Ti
electrode reached 68.4 mF cm¡1 at a scan rate of 10 mV s¡1
,
while it remained at 52.6 mF cm¡1 under a scan rate of 200 mV s¡1
(Fig. 3c), suggesting its high-rate performance. The specific capacity of electrode calculated from galvanostatic charge-discharge
(GCD) curves (Fig. 3b) also shows the high-rate behavior of the
supercapacitor. It reached 85.5 mF cm¡1 at a current density of
0.02 mA cm¡1 and it remained at 56.5 mF cm¡1 for a current
density of 0.5 mA cm¡1 (Fig. 3c). The specific capacitance of electrode with bending angles of 0◦, 30◦, 60◦ and 120◦ under a scan rate
of 10 mV s
¡1 is shown in Fig. 3d. The capacitance even increased
slightly during bending, which may be due to the improved interfacial interaction between the active material and the solid electrolyte. It is noted that the specific capacity of our PP-PEO-3/Ti
electrode is much higher than those one-step prepared fibershaped electrodes reported in the literature (Fig. 3e) [26–30]. Our
PP-PEO-3/Ti based supercapacitors also show excellent cycling stability,
as demonstrated in Fig. S5. More than 86% of the initial capacitance was
retained after 5000 charge-discharge cycles.
The PP-PEO-3/Ti based supercapacitors were conducted under
different temperature, different time with underwater immersion,
different bending times, and their CV curves were presented in Fig. S6.
Thanks to the excellent interfacial contact between electrode and electrolyte, the CV curves of the device show almost no change with the
temperature range from 0 ◦C to 50 ◦C (Fig. S6a). Even socked in water
for 24 h, the electrochemical performance of the device still remains
stable, which exhibits its outstanding water stability (Fig. S6b). After
10,000 bending times, the device keeps 96% of initial capacity
(Fig. S6c), which demonstrated its outstanding flexibility. All the feature
indicates our PP-PEO-3/Ti based supercapacitors is promising candidate
for the wearable energy storage device.
It is worth emphasizing that due to the excellent interface between
PVA-H2SO4 and PP-PEO active material layer, the active material even
under a high mass loading can be efficiently utilized contributing to the
capacitance. This can be observed in Fig. 3f, where the devices based on
PP-PEO-1/Ti (thickness: 1.4 mm, mass loading: 0.66 mg cm− 1
), PP-PEO2/Ti (2.0 mm, 1.27 mg cm− 1
), PP-PEO-3/Ti (2.7 mm, 2.43 mg cm− 1
)
show almost linear dependence of capacitance on the mass loading,
especially at low scan rates. This so-called thick-independence or massindependence of specific capacitance is favorable when fabricating cost-
effective devices with high mass loading. CV and GCD characterizations
of supercapacitors based on the PP-PEO-1/Ti and PP-PEO-2/Ti are
presented in Fig. S7. 

3.3. Fiber-shaped solid-state supercapacitor
In our work, PP-PEO-3/Ti electrodes were integrated into light and
flexible non-woven fabrics to test their application in flexible electronics
(Fig. 4a and b). They successfully powered the electronic watch and
electronic thermohydrometer. The device structure and its integrated 
process were shown in Fig. S8. Multiple-connected supercapacitors were
also tested. The capacitance of the parallel-connected devices linearly
depended on the number of devices connected (Fig. 4c and d), while for
series connection. It is the voltage that linearly depended on the number
of devices connected. (Fig. 4e and f). These results suggest our PP-PEO/
Ti fiber-shaped supercapacitor is very promising as flexible energy
storage for wearable electronics.

3.4. Preparation and characterization of PANI@PP-PEO/Ti electrodes
With its nanoscale 3D morphology and conductivity, PP-PEO/Ti can
be applied as a 3D current collector for loading other active materials. In
the following, it was used as a template to fabricate PANI@PP-PEO-2/Ti
composited fiber electrodes through introducing the pseudocapacitance
effect of PANI. With different mass loading of PANI, electrodes of PANI50@PP-PEO-2/Ti, PANI-100@PP-PEO-2/Ti, PANI-200@PP-PEO-2/Ti
were fabricated. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurement was conducted in characterizing PANI@PP-PEO-2 and PPPEO-2 fibers (Fig. S10). PP-PEO-2 exhibited peaks at 1429 and 1288
cm− 1 corresponding to C–C inter-ring stretching and C–
–C symmetrical
stretching at 1429 cm− 1 for PEO-blended [31]. In contrast,
PANI@PP-PEO-2 fiber showed five peaks at 1593, 1454, 1254, 878 and 
747 cm− 1
. C–
–C stretching vibration in PANI can be found at 1593 and
1494 cm− 1 [32,33]. The peaks at 743 and 879 cm− 1 are associated with
the vibration of C–H stretching [34]. C–N stretching vibration as the
characteristic peak of PANI appeared at 1254 cm− 1
, confirming PANI
was successfully loaded on PP-PEO fibers [35]. The surface morphology
of PANI@PP-PEO-2 was also studied, as shown in Fig. S9 a, b. A
cross-section view of the is shown in Fig. S9c.
CV measurement of the PANI@PP-PEO-2/Ti electrodes was conducted under a scan rate of 10–200 mV s
− 1 (Figs. S11a–c) and the
calculated capacitances are presented in Fig. 5a. Thanks to the pseudocapacitive contribution from PANI, the length-specific capacitance of
PANI@PP-PEO-2/Ti is as high as 136.7 mF cm− 1 at the scan rate of 10
mV s
− 1
, which is nearly five times larger than that of PP-PEO-2/Ti. It is
worth mentioning that the length-specific capacity of our PANI@PPPEO-2/Ti is higher than most reported fiber-shaped electrodes
(Fig. 5b) [23,36–42].

4. Conclusion
In this work, a one-step process of fabricating gel-electrolyte-friendly
fiber-shaped aerogel electrodes via electrospinning is reported, with
curly-like PP-PEO nanofiber aerogel coated on a centering Ti wire. The 
conductivity of PP-PEO nanofibers in the electrospinning process determines their curly-like aerogel morphology feature. This unique
structure with high porosity and excellent hydrophilicity is very effective for the absorption PVA-H2SO4 electrolyte to reduce contact resistance. The PP-PEO-3/Ti exhibits a specific capacity as high as 68.4 mF
cm− 1
. Using PP-PEO-2/Ti as a 3D current collector, the as-prepared
PANI@PP-PEO-2/Ti fiber-shaped electrode exhibits a fiber-lengthspecific capacitance as large as 136.7 mF cm− 1
. The reported structure, with its facile fabrication method, is very promising for fabricating
all solid-state fiber-shaped energy storage devices.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Congrui Bai: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original
draft, Visualization. Yaqin Wang: Data curation, Validation. Zhaoyang
Fan: Resources, Writing – review & editing. Long Yan: Resources. Huan
Jiao: Conceptualization, Project administration, Funding acquisition,
Supervision. 

